
===== PAGE 1 =====

===== PAGE 2 =====

===== PAGE 3 =====

===== PAGE 4 =====
Table of ConTenTs
InTo The WaITIng nIghT 1
CharaCTer CreaTIon 3
PsIonICs 29
sysTems 45
equIPmenT and VehICles 61
sTarshIPs 93
The hIsTory of sPaCe 121
seCTor CreaTIon 129
adVenTure CreaTIon 173
XenobesTIary 193
faCTIons 211
game masTer resourCes 231
Transhuman CamPaIgns 248
sPaCe magIC 266
heroIC CharaCTers 274
True arTIfICIal InTellIgenCes 280
soCIeTIes 290
meChs 300
IndeX 314
ISBN 978-1-936673-95-7
©2017 Sine Nomine Publishing, Inc.
Written by Kevin Crawford
Cover background provided by NASA, ESA, and The Hubble Heritage Team (STScI), and edited by Jeff Brown.
Interior art by Jeff Brown, Christof Grobelski, Norah Khor, Aaron Lee, Joyce Maureira, Nick Ong, Grzegorz Pedrycz, 
and Tan Ho Sim. Some art © grandfailure / Adobe Stock.
Character sheet by Brian McGillivray
===== PAGE 5 =====
A Word to Newbies
If Stars Without Number is your first tabletop 
role-playing game, you’re a rare soul. Most of 
the readers of this book will already be familiar 
with the hobby, but fear not; tabletop RPGs aren’t 
hard to understand. Just think of them as a pen -
cil-and-paper equivalent of a computer RPG, with 
a “game master” or “GM” in place of the computer, 
and 2-5 players playing “player character” avatars.
You’ll need paper, pencils, and a set of poly -
hedral dice or a dice app to play the game. You 
can get gaming dice online easily. When the book 
tells you to roll “2d10+1”, for example, it means 
to roll two ten-sided dice and add them together, 
then add one to the result. “d00” means to roll two 
10-sided dice and read them as ones and tens.
INTO THE WAITING NIGHT
Welcome, reader, to Stars Without Number , a science 
fiction role-playing game. Within the pages of this 
book you will find all that you require to forge mighty 
tales both of victory and bitter defeat amid the silent 
stars above. You will fashion heroes fit for this new 
age of exploration and rediscovery, men and women 
capable of unearthing the lost wonders of humanity’s 
fallen empire. The scattered sectors of the old Terran 
Mandate have been out of communication for centu -
ries, and no one living can know all the strange won-
ders that have been born in the Silence. Every fresh 
world is a new marvel to discover, and the brave souls 
willing to repair the broken web of contact can expect 
rich rewards for their efforts.
Stars Without Number is not only a game of discov-
ery, however. There are adventures to be had in more 
familiar places as well. New polities and young empires 
have sprung up in the centuries since the collapse of the 
Terran Mandate, and they struggle with each other as 
hotly as their technology and resources allow. The right 
hero at the right time can shift the fate of worlds, and 
heroes willing to fight for their beliefs can be the great-
est resources a struggling star nation possesses. There 
are adventures to be had in dealing with the powers 
of a stellar sector, where men and women are needed 
to foil the sinister plans of enemies and bring victory.
Not every hero has a mind for high goals, howev-
er. Many desire nothing more than freedom and the 
credits to enjoy it. Whether hauling cargo to backwater 
worlds or selling their lasers to the highest bidder, these 
mercenary adventurers go where the pay is good and 
the danger is acceptable. Some have greater ideals than 
their next patron’s pay, while others have no devotion 
to anything but their own interest. Stars Without Num-
ber has room for both kinds of heroes, and tools to help 
a game master provide the adventures they require.
Stars Without Number is above all a set of tools 
for players and game masters bent on sci-fi adventure. 
While the setting is built to provide a wide scope for 
daring deeds, the game is fundamentally meant to be 
reshaped and refocused to suit your particular interests 
and desires. Whether a gritty game of desperate mer-
cenary gunmen in an interstellar war zone or a dashing 
campaign of star-faring adventurers in a space-operatic 
sector, the game is meant to fit the needs and tone of 
your desired play.
Stars Without Number belongs to the “old-school 
renaissance” trend in gaming, and draws much of its 
mechanical inspiration from the classic games of the 
seventies and the work of such authors as Gary Gygax, 
Tom Moldvay, Zeb Cook, Marc Miller, and other lu -
minaries of those days. While many people now prefer 
different mechanical frameworks for their play, these 
“old-school” rules are understood by a tremendous 
number of gamers and form a convenient lingua franca 
between many different OSR games. These games are 
usually broadly compatible with each other, and allow 
players to loot material from many different authors 
and time periods with limited effort at conversion. 
This game is also designed to be a “sandbox game”, 
one built to ease the creation of active, living campaign 
worlds where the PCs aren’t the only important figures, 
and where a hero doesn’t necessarily have any narrative 
armor against failure and death. While it can certainly 
be played in a more conventional adventure path or 
story-arc manner, Stars Without Number is stocked 
with a wide range of tools, techniques, and guidelines 
for easing sandbox play. The surprise and freshness 
inherent in a good sandbox game can be a refreshing 
change of pace for many groups, and in this book you’ll 
find what you need to play in that style.
The book you hold in hand right now is the re -
vised edition of the original 2010 version of the game. 
In compiling the revision, I have been careful to keep it 
compatible with the existing material for the game, so 
you should be able to use original edition supplements 
with minimal fuss. Rather than changing the bones of 
the system, I have instead added additional material to 
help GMs and entertain players, expanding the scope 
of the game. If you are reading the free PDF version of 
this game, you will find everything you need for a full 
campaign in these pages. If you have the deluxe version 
in hand, you will find almost a hundred pages of bonus 
content to supply you with tools for transhuman sci-
fi campaigns, space-operatic heroes, stellar wizardry, 
mechs, artificial intelligences, and tools for building 
sci-fi societies.
Above all, Stars Without Number is your game now. 
There is no one “correct” way to play it. There is only 
your way to play it, and you should feel free to make it 
the game you want to play.
===== PAGE 6 =====

===== PAGE 7 =====
Rolling a Character
Stars Without Number belongs to a somewhat older 
tradition in tabletop RPGs, one where characters 
aren’t so much “built” as they are “rolled”. Players 
often don’t know who exactly they’re going to be 
playing in a campaign, and rely on random rolls to 
determine a hero’s aptitudes and skills. Part of the 
pleasure of the game is throwing these new-rolled 
cyphers into play and exploring their personalities 
and motivations directly through the events of the 
adventures they undertake.
In most modern games, however, a player 
expects to be able to create exactly the kind of PC 
they’ve envisioned before the campaign begins. 
They don’t want to rely on random rolls to give 
them the character they’re going to be playing.
This is a perfectly valid preference, and play -
ers who want to have full control over creating 
their hero can do so with an attribute array and 
skills picked from a selected background. Even 
so, players without strong feelings on the matter 
might find it refreshing to let their hero’s past be 
discovered by the unpredictable chance of the dice.
CHARACTER CREATION
Before you can begin playing Stars Without Number, 
you need to roll up a character. While the game can 
theoretically work with just a single player and a GM, 
things work best with 2–5 friends in addition to the 
GM. A lone adventurer can get in a lot of trouble out 
there, and a small group can find it hard to include all 
the different skills and talents that are often required 
to survive a sticky situation.
With that in mind, you and the others in your 
gaming group should give a little thought to making 
characters that work well together. Grim loners make 
good book protagonists, but they don’t survive well 
when there’s no author around to bail them out.
When making a character, some players like to 
simply throw the dice and see where they lead. Others 
prefer to know a little more about the game world and 
like to have more detail provided beforehand about the 
worlds and themes of the game. For those who’d prefer 
a more detailed discussion of the world of Stars Without 
Number, you can skip ahead to page 120 and read up on 
it there. For the rest of you…
What Players Need To Know
Your character is an adventurer in the year 3200, a 
dweller among the scattered worlds of a great human 
diaspora. For whatever reason, he or she has decided 
to leave their old life behind and take up a starfaring 
existence, daring perils and seeking new frontiers in 
search of glory, riches, or their own personal ambitions.
Many worlds have recovered from the despera -
tion of the centuries-long Silence, and can once again 
manufacture spacecraft and other advanced technology. 
Other worlds are “lost worlds”, still cut off from inter-
stellar trade and forced to make do with the resources 
of their own planet. Lostworlders are often considered 
barbaric by technologically advanced worlds.
Tramp freighters, small merchant ships, and scout 
craft serve most worlds, even the most backward. If 
your character comes from a primitive or isolated cul -
ture, it’s probable that he or she hitched a ride aboard 
such a ship to travel to a more cosmopolitan life. It may 
or may not have been a voluntary choice.
In actual play, your character should be motivated 
to act, and to act as part of a group. The game does 
not deal well with hostile loners, apathetic brooders, or 
other characters that have to be coaxed into engaging 
with the world and cooperating with the rest of the 
group. The world of Stars Without Number  is danger-
ous, and characters who cringe from peril or insist on 
facing it alone will find only boredom or an early grave.
Every character should have a goal from the very 
start. This might be something as simple as “become 
wealthy beyond my fondest dreams of avarice” or “be 
known as the greatest pilot in the sector”. It might be 
as elaborate as “engineer the downfall of the interstellar 
empire that conquered my world”. Whatever it is, it 
should give your character an immediate reason to go 
out and do something.
This will to act is especially crucial in Stars With -
out Number, because this game is designed to support 
a “sandbox” style of gaming. Unlike many other games 
that encourage the development of a particular story 
or the playing out of a specific plot line, Stars Without 
Number presents an entire interstellar sector to your 
characters and invites you to choose for yourself how 
to experience it. Stories will arise based on what your 
characters do and how they respond to the adventure 
situations provided by the GM.
As a player, you need to cooperate with your GM. 
This doesn’t necessarily mean following every lead and 
hook you’re given without demurral, but it does mean 
that you need to respond to the situations and possi -
bilities that are given to you.
You also need to keep in mind that your adven -
turers exist in a very large world that is not scaled to 
your characters’ abilities. If you insist on throwing your 
characters into situations or challenges that seem over-
whelming, the odds are that they will overwhelm you. 
Scouting, reconnaissance, and careful intelligence gath-
ering will help you recognize no-win situations before 
you push ahead into them. By the same token, don’t 
hesitate to flee if your party appears to be facing certain 
doom. A keen sense of when to decamp the field is 
often an experienced adventurer’s most valuable asset.
===== PAGE 8 =====
4• Summary of CharaCter Creation
a summary of CharaCTer CreaTIon
For your convenience, here’s a quick summary of the 
character creation process. Experienced players can 
simply go down the list to generate their next interstel-
lar freebooter, while those new to the game can use it as 
a guide reference as they go through the steps detailed 
on the following pages. A blank character sheet can be 
found at the end of the book.
Note that some steps indicate that you should roll 
or pick skills, as described on page 7. The first time you 
roll or pick a skill, it starts at level-0. The second time, 
it becomes level-1. The third time, you can instead pick 
any other non-psychic skill of your choice that’s less 
than level-1. No novice hero’s skills can exceed level-1 
during character creation.
1. Roll your six attributes or assign them from an 
array, using Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, 
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Attributes 
reflect the basic potential of your hero. Roll 3d6 
six times and assign them in order, or use an 
array of 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, 7 assigned as you wish. 
If you randomly roll your scores you may then 
pick one attribute to change to a score of 14.
2. Mark down your attribute modifiers for each 
score. When rolling dice that are affected by an 
attribute, you don’t apply the whole score; in -
stead, you apply the attribute modifier. A score 
of 3 is a -2, 4—7 is a -1, 8—13 is no modifier, 
14—17 is +1, and 18 is +2.
3. Pick a background from the list on page 9, one 
that most closely reflects your hero’s past ex -
periences. You gain the skill listed under the 
background name at level-0, which equates to 
an ordinary working knowledge of it.
4. Decide whether to roll for additional skills or 
pick them. If you pick skills, you can choose two 
more skills from the Learning table for your 
background, with the exception of entries that 
say “Any Skill”, which you may not pick. You 
cannot pick entries from the Growth table. If 
you’re not sure what to pick, just take the “Quick 
Skills” listed for your background at level-0, 
which include your background’s beginning skill.
5. If you choose to roll for your skills, you can roll up 
to three times, dividing up your rolls between 
the Growth and Learning tables as you wish. 
When you roll on the Growth table, some re -
sults may say “+2 Physical” or “+2 Mental”. In 
the former case, you can add two points to ei -
ther Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution, or one 
point to two different stats. In the latter case, 
you can add two points to either Intelligence, 
Wisdom, or Charisma, or divide the bonus be-
tween two of them.
6. Choose your class , representing those talents 
you have that are most relevant to an adven -
turer’s lifestyle. If your hero isn’t well-described 
by Warrior, Expert, or Psychic, you can choose 
Adventurer and mix your class abilities.
7. Choose your foci, representing the side talents 
or particular specializations of your hero. You 
can pick one level of a focus of your choice. 
Characters with the Expert class or the Partial 
Expert feature of the Adventurer class get one 
level of a non-combat, non-psychic focus for 
free in addition to this. They can spend both 
levels on the same focus, starting with level 2 
in it if they wish. Characters with the Warrior 
class or Partial Warrior feature of the Adventur-
er class can do the same in choosing one level of 
a combat focus. 
8. Optionally, if your GM is allowing alien PCs or 
VI or True AI PCs, you can make your character 
into one such creature by spending your focus 
level on the appropriate origin focus. Aliens and 
VIs are described in the Xenobestiary chapter, 
starting on page 192, while True AIs are part 
of the deluxe Stars Without Number core book, 
starting on page 280.
9. Now pick one non-psychic skill  of your choice to 
reflect your hero’s outside interests, natural tal-
ents, hobby expertise, or other personal focus.
10. If you’ve chosen the Psychic class or chosen to be 
an Adventurer with the Partial Psychic ability, 
you are a psychic PC, with powers described 
in the following section, starting on page 28. 
Psychics can pick two psychic skills from those 
listed on page 8, while Partial Psychics can pick 
one. If a Psychic picks the same skill twice, they 
get it at level-1 expertise, and can pick a free 
level-1 technique from those listed for that dis-
cipline. Both Psychics and Partial Psychics get 
the level-0 abilities associated with their skills, 
as described under each discipline they possess. 
Both also have a maximum Effort score equal to 
1 plus their highest psychic skill plus the better of 
their Wisdom or Constitution modifiers.
11. Roll your maximum hit points on 1d6, adding 
your Constitution modifier. Even a penalty can’t 
reduce your hit points below 1. Warrior PCs 
===== PAGE 9 =====
Summary of CharaCter Creation •5 
and Adventurers with the Partial Warrior class 
option add 2 points to this total. Hit points in-
dicate how close your hero is to being defeated.
12. Note down any base attack bonus you may have. 
The higher the attack bonus, the easier it is for 
your hero to land a telling blow or shot on a 
hostile opponent. For most PCs, this bonus is 
+0. If you are a Warrior or an Adventurer with 
the Partial Warrior class option, it’s +1.
13. Choose one of the equipment packages on page 25 
or roll 2d6 x 100 to find out how many starting 
credits you have with which to buy gear.
14. Mark down your total hit bonus  with your weap-
onry. This is equal to your base attack bonus, 
plus either your Punch, Stab, or Shoot skill de-
pending on the kind of weapon it is, plus your 
relevant attribute modifier. The weapon tables 
starting on page 66 will tell you what attribute 
is used for a particular weapon. If two attributes 
are listed, use the best one for your hero. If you 
haven’t even got level-0 skill, take a -2 penalty.
15. Note down the damage done by your weapons. 
This is equal to its base damage dice plus its at-
tribute modifier. If it’s a Punch weapon, you can 
add your Punch skill as well.
16. Record your Armor Class , the measure of how 
hard it is to hurt your hero in a fight. Different 
suits of armor grant different Armor Classes; if 
you aren’t wearing any armor at all, your base 
AC is 10. Add your Dexterity modifier to this. In 
order to hurt your PC, an enemy has to roll an 
attack roll on a d20, adding their attack bonus 
and equaling or exceeding your Armor Class. 
17. Note down your beginning saving throw scores 
for your Physical, Evasion, and Mental saving 
throws. Physical saves against poison, disease, 
or exhaustion are 15 minus the best of your 
Strength or Constitution modifiers. Evasion 
saves to dodge sudden perils or dive away from 
explosives are 15 minus the best of your Intelli -
gence and Dexterity modifiers. Mental saves to 
resist psychic influence or mind-bending tech -
nology are 15 minus the best of your Wisdom or 
Charisma modifiers. To resist these perils, you 
need to equal or beat the save on a d20.
18. Lastly, wrap up your PC with a name and a goal. 
Every hero needs to have a goal when they set 
out adventuring. This goal might change, but 
your PC should always have some reason to go 
out and interact with the world before them. 
Stay-at-home PCs and those unwilling to dare 
greatly for their aims are rarely fun to play.
Name
XP
STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIS
CHA
3 (-2)  |  4-7 (-1)  |  8-13 (+0)  |  14-17 (+1)  |  18 (+2)
Boosts:   1st: 1sp (lvl 1)  |  2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)
3rd: 3sp (lvl 3)  |  4th: 4sp (lvl 6)  |  5th: 5sp (lvl 9)
Attributes
Homeworld
Species
Employer
Level
Readied Items Max Enc  =  STR ÷ 2
Cybernetics / Innate Abilities
Foci +1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 5, lvl 7 & lvl 10
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Psionic Techniques +1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl  
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
Weapons                                                                                     Range and Ammo              Total Atk Bonus
Mods
Name AC
Mods
Name AC
Mods
Name AC
Armor
Background
Cost:  new value + 1 Max:  +2 at lvl 3  |  +3 at lvl 6  |  +4 at lvl 9
Administer
Shoot
Sneak
Stab
Survive
Talk
Trade
Work
Biopsionics
Metapsionics
Precognition
Telekinesis
Telepathy
Teleportation
Connect
Exert
Fix
Heal
Know
Lead
Notice
Perform
Pilot
Program
Punch
+3sp per lvl  (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat)
Warrior  =  +Lvl  |  Other  =  +(Lvl ÷ 2)
Partial Warrior  =  +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5Base Atk Bonus + Skill Points
Psionic Effort Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con Max:
Hitpoints / Conditions Max:
(1D6 + Con) x Level Warriors:  Additional +2 per level
System Strain
Max = CON
Permanent:
Saves
Physical Evasion Mental
16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha]
Stars Without Number Character Sheet
Lvl 11+ = +24
Lvl 10 = 93xp
Lvl 9 = 72xp
Lvl 8 = 54xp
Lvl 7 = 39xp
Lvl 6 = 27xp
Lvl 5 = 18xp
Lvl 4 = 12xp
Lvl 3 = 6xp
Lvl 2 = 3xp
Credits Debts
Class
1, 23 4, 5, 9
6
7,8
10
11
12
13
14, 15
16
17
18
===== PAGE 10 =====
Rolling a PC’s Attributes
Simon’s rolling up a character for a new campaign. 
The first step is to figure out what kind of hero he’s 
going to be playing in the upcoming game, and that 
means determining attributes.
If Simon had a particular concept he knew he 
wanted to play, choosing to use the array might be 
a good idea. It provides a predictable set of numbers 
he can put in whatever order he wishes, and unless 
his concept requires that his PC be particularly gifted 
in more than one attribute, the 14 that’s part of the 
array would ensure that he was capable in whatever 
natural aptitude was most important to the concept.
On the other hand, even if he rolls the dice, he 
knows his hero is going to be good at something. He 
can put that free 14 in any attribute he wishes, so if 
all he cares about is making sure his PC is quick, he 
can rest assured that random rolling will still pro -
duce a quick PC.
Simon, however, really doesn’t have any partic-
ular concept he knows he wants to play for this cam-
paign. He decides he’s going to let the dice determine 
what kind of hero he’s going to play. Letting the dice 
make the decision helps him break out of any ruts he 
might be in when it comes to character concepts, and 
it can make him consider ideas that might be fresher 
in play than his usual fare.
Simon takes three six-sided dice in hand and 
rolls them six times, assigning each number in order 
to his Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, 
Wisdom, and Charisma scores. His results are 10, 4, 
13, 16, 8, and 7.
Since 10 or 11 is an average human score, Simon 
can see that this PC has a very considerable intel -
lect counterbalanced by pronounced clumsiness and 
poor social skills. Because he rolled his statistics, he 
can replace one of the rolls with a score of 14. After 
some consideration, Simon decides that swapping 
out his bad Dexterity score makes the most sense.
Now Simon notes down the attribute modifi -
ers for each of his scores: a Strength of 10 is +0, a 
Dexterity of 14 is +1, a Constitution of 13 is +0, an 
Intelligence of 16 is +1, a Wisdom of 8 is +0, and a 
Charisma of 7 is -1.
When rolling skill checks, attack rolls, or other 
things modified by an attribute, Simon will be using 
the modifier rather than the full attribute score. The 
scores themselves might change a little due to his 
hero’s background or future personal training, but 
mostly they’ll serve as cues for playing the PC. With 
a Wisdom of 8, for example, Simon’s hero might not 
have a penalty to rolls, but he probably makes the 
occasional decision he lives to regret.
6• attributeS
aTTrIbuTes
The first step in creating a character is to determine 
the character’s six attributes. Attributes describe how 
strong, quick, clever, perceptive, hardy, or charming 
your hero might be. Attributes are measured by scores 
ranging from 3 to 18, with 3 reflecting an attribute 
so weak that the PC is barely fit for adventuring and 
an 18 marking the maximum possible aptitude for an 
ordinary human.
To generate a character’s attributes, roll 3d6 six 
times and assign the results in order to Strength, Dex-
terity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charis-
ma. You may then change one attribute of your choice 
to 14 if you wish to ensure that your new adventurer 
is gifted in at least one way.
If you prefer not to roll, you may instead assign 
the following scores to your attributes in any order you 
wish: 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, and 7. If you assign your scores, 
you cannot replace one of them with a 14.
Once you’ve assigned your attributes, record the 
modifier for each of them. This modifier is applied to 
relevant skill checks or other rolls related to the attri -
bute. If your attribute score changes during play, ei -
ther from some crippling injury or from improvements 
granted by your background or experience, you should 
make sure to update any changed modifier.
Attribute Score Modifier
3 -2
4—7 -1
8—13 +0
14—17 +1
18 +2
Attribute Affects....
Strength Physical prowess, melee combat, 
carrying gear, brute force
Dexterity Speed, evasion, manual dexterity, 
reaction time, combat initiative
Constitution Hardiness, enduring injury, resisting 
toxins, going without food or sleep
Intelligence Memory, reasoning, technical skills, 
general education
Wisdom Noticing things, making judgments, 
reading situations, intuition
Charisma Commanding, charming, attracting 
attention, being taken seriously
===== PAGE 11 =====
SkillS •7 
Skill Level
Level-0 Basic competence in the skill, such as 
an ordinary practitioner would have
Level-1 An experienced professional in the 
skill, clearly better than most
Level-2 Veteran expert, one respected even 
by those with considerable experience
Level-3 Master of the skill, likely one of the 
best on the planet
Level-4 Superlative expertise, one of the best 
in the entire stellar sector. 
skIlls
Your hero’s learned capabilities are skills, and every 
star-faring adventurer has their share of them. A hero 
can usually attempt to do anything, whether it’s to 
climb a sun-scorched cliff on an alien world, talk down 
an enraged lostworlder warlord, or fire a mag rifle at 
a charging xenomorph, but having the right skill can 
make a vast difference in results.
Skills are measured in a rating from level-0 for 
competent practitioners to level-4 for the best in the 
sector. Novice heroes start with level-0 or level-1 in 
their skills. You’ll choose or roll skills in the next sec -
tion, when you select a background for your character.
Skill Checks
Your hero is assumed to be competent at all the ordi-
nary functions of their role and background. If he’s a 
moisture farmer from a back-of-nowhere desert world, 
he’s going to know how to keep a dew still running and 
how to put on a coolsuit. If she’s a corporate magnate’s 
succession-groomed daughter from a megacorp-dom -
inated hiveworld, she’s going to know how to read a 
balance sheet and speak during a meeting with C-level 
executives. They will never fail at these basic tasks un-
less some situation makes them much harder than usual.
Sometimes, however, the hero will be faced with 
a situation outside their usual experience, or will try 
to accomplish a normal task while under considerable 
strain or disadvantage. In those cases, you’ll need to 
roll a skill check.
To roll a skill check, roll 2d6 and add the most 
applicable attribute modifier and skill level. If the total 
is equal or greater than the difficulty of the check, you 
succeed. If less, something goes wrong, or you fail out-
right in the attempt, or something unexpected happens.
If you haven’t even got level-0 in the relevant skill 
you take a -1 penalty to the roll. Some particularly tech-
nical or difficult feats might not be achievable at all 
without some grounding in the skill.
===== PAGE 12 =====
8• attributeS
The Skill List
The following skills are standard choices for most cam-
paigns. Games set in unusual reaches of space or unique 
settings might alter this list.
Skills are general, and some of them may overlap 
in some situations. A hero trying to clear a jammed dis-
ruptor cannon before the aliens break through the door 
might plausibly check either Fix to repair it or Shoot to 
represent their familiarity with weapons maintenance. 
Assuming the GM agrees, you can roll whichever skill 
is better for you.
Administer: Manage an organization, handle paper -
work, analyze records, and keep an institution 
functioning on a daily basis. Roll it for bureau -
cratic expertise, organizational management, le -
gal knowledge, dealing with government agencies, 
and understanding how institutions really work.
Connect: Find people who can be helpful to your pur-
poses and get them to cooperate with you. Roll 
it to make useful connections with others, find 
people you know, know where to get illicit goods 
and services, and be familiar with foreign cultures 
and languages. You can use it in place of Talk for 
persuading people you find via this skill.
Exert: Apply trained speed, strength, or stamina in 
some feat of physical exertion. Roll it to run, jump, 
lift, swim, climb, throw, and so forth. You can use 
it as a combat skill when throwing things, though 
it doesn’t qualify as a combat skill for other ends.
Fix: Create and repair devices both simple and complex. 
How complex will depend on your character’s 
background; a lostworlder blacksmith is going to 
need some study time before he’s ready to fix that 
broken fusion reactor, though he can do it eventu-
ally. Roll it to fix things, build things, and identify 
what something is supposed to do.
Heal: Employ medical and psychological treatment for 
the injured or disturbed. Roll it to cure diseases, 
stabilize the critically injured, treat psychological 
disorders, or diagnose illnesses.
Know: Know facts about academic or scientific fields. 
Roll it to understand planetary ecologies, remem-
ber relevant history, solve science mysteries, and 
know the basic facts about rare or esoteric topics.
Lead: Convince others to also do whatever it is you’re 
trying to do. Talk might persuade them that fol-
lowing you is smart, but Lead can make them do 
it even when they think it’s a bad idea. Roll it to 
lead troops in combat, convince others to follow 
you, or maintain morale and discipline.
Notice: Spot anomalies or interesting facts about your 
environment. Roll it for searching places, detect -
ing ambushes, spotting things, and reading the 
emotional state of other people.
Perform: Exhibit some performative skill. Roll it to 
dance, sing, orate, act, or otherwise put on a con-
vincing or emotionally moving performance.
Pilot: Use this skill to pilot vehicles or ride beasts. Roll 
it to fly spaceships, drive vehicles, ride animals, 
or tend to basic vehicle repair. This skill doesn’t 
help you with things entirely outside the scope 
of your background or experience, though with 
some practice a PC can expand their expertise.
Program: Operating or hacking computing and com -
munications hardware. Roll it to program or hack 
computers, control computer-operated hardware, 
operate communications tech, or decrypt things.
Punch: Use it as a combat skill when fighting unarmed. 
If your PC means to make a habit of this rather 
than as a recourse of desperation, you should take 
the Unarmed Fighter focus described later.
Shoot: Use it as a combat skill when using ranged weap-
onry, whether hurled rocks, bows, laser pistols, 
combat rifles, or ship’s gunnery.
Sneak: Move without drawing notice. Roll it for stealth, 
disguise, infiltration, manual legerdemain, pick -
pocketing, and the defeat of security measures.
Stab: Use it as a combat skill when wielding melee 
weapons, whether primitive or complex.
Survive: Obtain the basics of food, water, and shelter 
in hostile environments, along with avoiding their 
natural perils. Roll it to handle animals, navigate 
difficult terrain, scrounge urban resources, make 
basic tools, and avoid wild beasts or gangs.
Talk: Convince other people of the facts you want them 
to believe. What they do with that conviction may 
not be completely predictable. Roll it to persuade, 
charm, or deceive others in conversation.
Trade: Find what you need on the market and sell what 
you have. Roll it to sell or buy things, figure out 
where to purchase hard-to-get or illicit goods, deal 
with customs agents, or run a business.
Work: This is a catch-all skill for professions not repre-
sented by other skills. Roll it to work at a particular 
profession, art, or trade.
Psychic Skills
Unlike other skills, psychic skills are restricted to char-
acters with the Psychic class or the Partial Psychic class 
option for Adventurers. You cannot choose or roll 
these skills in character creation unless specifically told 
to pick a psychic skill.
Biopsionics: Master powers of physical repair, body aug-
mentation, and shapeshifting.
Metapsionics: Master powers that nullify, boost, and 
shape the use of other psychic abilities.
Precognition: Master the ability to sense future events 
and control probability.
Telekinesis: Master the remote control of kinetic energy 
to move objects and fabricate force constructs.
Telepathy: Master the reading and influencing of other 
sapient minds.
Teleportation: Master the arts of physical translocation 
of yourself and allies.
===== PAGE 13 =====
baCkgroundS •9 
ChoosIng a baCkground
It’s unlikely that your character sprang forth full-grown 
from the endless depths of space, so it’s probable that he 
or she had some sort of background before adventuring 
and some kind of training in a field suitable for the life 
of an interstellar wayfarer. Of course, the call of adven-
ture is somewhat indiscriminate, and some people from 
very unlikely walks of life might find themselves hurled 
into the potentially-lethal excitement of deep space. To 
determine your hero’s past training, you need to choose 
or roll a background.
A background is simply a thumbnail description 
of the kind of life your hero lived before they took up 
adventuring. It may not have been the only thing they 
did with their life, but it’s the thing that taught them 
most of their existing skills.
When you’ve chosen or rolled your background, 
take a moment to think about your character’s past. 
Decide how your character came to take up that pro-
fession, and what made them put it down to follow a 
more adventurous lifestyle. Did they do it for excite-
ment? Friendship? Money? Or were they just running 
from a situation they couldn’t handle?
You will also want to pick a homeworld for your 
PC. Your GM can give you some suggestions for worlds 
in their campaign that would fit your character concept, 
or you might simply make up your own homeworld or 
native space habitat with the GM’s permission, as you 
might be from some far-distant sector of space.
Twenty backgrounds are provided on the follow-
ing pages. You may roll randomly to see where your 
hero comes from, or pick one that suits you. If none of 
the backgrounds appeal to you, you can simply describe 
your hero’s prior life to the GM and pick any three 
skills that fit that past.
Backgrounds, Skills, and Growth
Once you pick a background, your hero gains several 
skills associated with their past.
First, you get the free skill associated with the 
background. Every member of that role or profession 
needs this skill to function competently, so your hero 
gets it as well.
Next, you may either pick two other skills from 
the Learning table for your background, or make three 
random rolls divided between the Growth and Learn-
ing tables. If you pick skills, you can select exactly the 
talents you want for your hero, while going with ran-
dom rolls allows your character a little wider range of 
competence and the option of attribute improvements 
at the cost of perfect control over their development. If 
you pick skills, you may pick the same skill twice if you 
wish, to improve its starting proficiency.
If you’re not sure what to pick, just take the three 
skills listed under “Quick Skills” for your background. 
They’re the ones most critical to the profession.
Training Skills and Attributes
When your character is allowed to pick or roll a skill, 
you learn it at level-0 expertise the first time you re -
ceive it. If you receive it a second time, it becomes lev-
el-1. If some mechanic or skill choice allows or obliges 
you to pick it a third time, you can instead choose any 
non-psychic skill in its place. The only way to raise 
psychic skills during character creation is via special 
abilities or foci that specifically boost them. No starting 
character can begin with a skill level higher than level-1.
Sometimes you’re allowed to pick “Any Skill”. This 
means you can choose any non-psychic skill to improve. 
Other entries that read “Any Combat” mean that you 
can pick either Stab, Shoot, or Punch as you choose. 
You cannot raise psychic skills with “Any Skill” picks.
Rolls on the Growth table that improve your basic 
attributes can boost them up to a maximum of 18. A 
bonus that applies to “Any Stat” can be applied to any 
attribute. If the roll says to add the bonus to Physical at-
tributes, you can add the bonus to either Strength, Dex-
terity, or Constitution. If the roll says to add a bonus 
to your Mental attributes, you can apply the points to 
either Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma. If the bonus 
is +2, you may split the points between two different 
attributes of the appropriate type if you wish.
d20 Background
1 Barbarian, born of a primitive world
2 Clergy, a consecrated man or woman
3 Courtesan, trading on pleasurable company
4 Criminal. thief, rogue, liar, or worse
5 Dilettante, with money if not purpose
6 Entertainer, artful and beguiling
7 Merchant, whether peddler or far trader
8 Noble, by blood or by social capital
9 Official, a functionary of some greater state
10 Peasant, whether primitive or high-tech
11 Physician, a healer of the sick and maimed
12 Pilot, or rider, or sailor, or vehicle-driver
13 Politician, aspiring to leadership and control
14 Scholar, a scientist or academic
15 Soldier, whether mercenary or conscript
16 Spacer, dwelling in the deep-space habs
17 Technician, artisan, engineer, or builder
18 Thug, ruffian, or strong arm of the people
19 Vagabond, roaming without a home
20 Worker, a cube drone or day laborer
===== PAGE 14 =====
Building a Background for a PC
Simon’s got his hero’s attributes set, but those are just 
part of making a character. He also needs to figure 
out where this hero came from, and what kind of 
life they’ve led before they took up the mantle of an 
adventuring existence.
If he had a particular preference for a back -
ground, he could simply pick one of the list on page 
9. If none of those fit, he could just write down a 
few sentences about the background he did want and 
pick three skills that fit it, assuming the GM agreed 
it made sense, or rolled on the existing background 
tables that best fit their custom past. But Simon is 
still uncertain about the nature of his hero, so he 
decides to roll randomly for a background.
He gets a 15, so his hero is a scholar. As a scholar, 
he automatically gets the Know skill at level-0, and 
needs to decide what kind of scholar he is. Simon 
considers his options and decides to go with some-
thing he knows; his PC is a literature post-doc by the 
name of Basil Hayes.
Simon decides that Basil should continue with 
his random rolling rather than just choosing two 
more skills from the Learning table for a scholar. 
Because he chooses to randomly roll, he can make 
three rolls, splitting them as he wishes between the 
Learning or the Growth table.
His first roll is on the Growth table, and it 
comes up “+2 Mental”. He immediately puts it into 
Intelligence, raising the score to 18 and giving it a +2 
modifier instead of +1. Basil is a brilliant man.
His second roll he makes on the Learning table, 
and it comes up “Know”. He already has Know at 
level-0, so now he gets Know-1. His third roll comes 
up “Talk”, giving him Talk-0.
A brief view of Basil’s history shows him as a 
brilliant young scholar with a keenly refined mind, 
an excellent grasp of intellectual topics, and enough 
glibness to get through a thesis defense. Simon de -
cides that Basil’s occasional fits of social ineptitude 
have torpedoed his career in academia, however, and 
have forced him out into the world to make a living 
as an interstellar freebooter.
Simon also needs to pick a homeworld for Basil. 
While he could ask the GM for a list of likely places, 
he decides that Basil hails from the cold and inhospi-
table world of Karelia, a planet that relies mostly on 
trading the long-duty service contracts of its citizens 
to other, wealthier worlds in exchange for vital tech. 
The GM thinks that Karelia sounds like the sort of 
world that would fit in the campaign, and so allows 
it. Simon can make up any other details of the world 
that are needed as the campaign plays out.
10• baCkgroundS
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Survive-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
Survive-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Lead
Notice-0 5 Exert 5 Notice
Any Combat-0 6 Any Skill 6 Punch
7 Sneak
8 Survive
Barbarian
Standards of barbarism vary when many worlds 
are capable of interstellar spaceflight, but your 
hero comes from a savage world of low technology 
and high violence. Their planet may have survived 
an all-consuming war, or been deprived of critical 
materials or energy resources, or simply have been 
colonized by confirmed Luddites. Other barbarians 
might be drawn from the impoverished underclass 
of advanced worlds or the technologically-degen -
erate inheritors of some high-tech space station or 
planetary hab.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Talk-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Know
Talk-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Lead
Perform-0 5 Connect 5 Notice
Know-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
7 Talk
8 Talk
Clergy
Faith is nigh-universal among human civilizations, 
and your hero is dedicated to one such belief. Some 
clergy are conventional priests or priestesses, while 
others might be cloistered monastics or nuns, or 
more martial warrior-monks. Modern-day faiths 
such as Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, 
Buddhism, and other creeds all exist in various sec-
tors, often in altered form, while some worlds have 
developed entirely new deities or faiths. If you’d like 
to create your own religion, you can work with the 
GM to define its characteristic beliefs.
===== PAGE 15 =====
baCkgroundS •1 1 
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Sneak-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Any Combat
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Connect
Sneak-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Notice
Connect-0 5 Connect 5 Program
Talk-0 6 Any Skill 6 Sneak
7 Talk
8 Trade
Criminal
Whether thief, murderer, forger, smuggler, spy, or 
some other variety of malefactor, your hero was a 
criminal. Some such rogues are guilty only of cross-
ing some oppressive government or offending a 
planetary lord, while others have done things that 
no civilized society could tolerate. Still, their ability 
to deal with the most desperate and dangerous of 
contacts and navigate the perils of a less-than-legal 
adventure can make them attractive associates for a 
party of freebooters bent on profit and glory more 
than strict legality.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Perform-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Exert
Perform-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
Notice-0 5 Connect 5 Perform
Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Survive
7 Talk
8 Trade
Courtesan
Your hero’s career was one of proffered pleasure. 
Simple prostitution is one form of this background, 
perhaps as an ordinary streetwalker, a part-time 
amateur with bills to pay, or an expensive com -
panion to the wealthy, but other forms of satisfac -
tion exist among the many worlds. Refined artists 
of conversation and grace command high fees in 
some societies, while others pay well for the sim -
ple company of certain men and women with the 
right bloodlines, special appearance, or auspicious 
personal qualities esteemed by their culture.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Connect-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Skill
2  +1 Any Stat 2 Any Skill
Quick Skills 3  +1 Any Stat 3 Connect
Connect-0 4  +1 Any Stat 4 Know
Know-0 5 Connect 5 Perform
Talk-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
7 Talk
8 Trade
Dilettante
Your hero never had a profession, strictly speaking, 
but spent their formative years in travel, socializing, 
and a series of engaging hobbies. They might have 
been the scion of a wealthy industrialist, a planetary 
noble’s younger offspring, or a hanger-on to some-
one with the money and influence they lacked. By 
the time your hero’s adventures start, they’ve run 
through the money that once fueled their lifestyle. 
Extreme measures may be necessary to acquire fur-
ther funding.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Perform-0
1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Exert
Perform-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Perform
Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
7 Sneak
8 Talk
Entertainer
Singers, dancers, actors, poets, writers… the inter-
stellar reaches teem with artists of unnumbered 
styles and mediums, some of which are only physi-
cally possible with advanced technological support. 
Your hero was a dedicated entertainer, one likely 
focused in a particular form of art. Patrons and 
talent scouts can be temperamental, however, and 
sometimes a budding artist needs to take steps to 
find their audience. Or at least, to find their audi -
ence’s money.
===== PAGE 16 =====
1 2• baCkgroundS
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Administer-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Any Skill
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
Administer-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Know
Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Lead
Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
7 Talk
8 Trade
Official
Most advanced worlds run on their bureaucra -
cies, the legions of faceless men and women who 
fill unnumbered roles in keeping the government 
running as it should. Your hero was one such offi-
cial. Some were law enforcement officers, others 
government office clerks or tax officials or trade 
inspectors. However necessary the work may be, 
it is often of unendurably tedious nature, and any 
man or woman with an adventurous spark to their 
blood will soon find themselves desperate for more 
exciting use of their talents.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Exert-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Connect
2  +2 Physical 2 Exert
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Fix
Exert-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
Sneak-0 5 Exert 5 Sneak
Survive-0 6 Any Skill 6 Survive
7 Trade
8 Work
Peasant
A technologically-advanced world can usually pro-
duce all its necessary foodstuffs and basic resources 
with a handful of workers, the bulk of the labor be-
ing performed by agricultural bots. On more prim-
itive worlds, or those with a natural environment 
that requires close personal attention to crops, a 
class of peasants will emerge. These men and wom-
en often become chattel, part and parcel of the land 
they occupy and traded among their betters like the 
farm equipment of richer worlds. Your hero was 
not satisfied with that life, and has done something 
to break free from their muddy and toilsome past.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Lead-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Any Combat
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
Lead-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Know
Connect-0 5 Connect 5 Lead
Administer-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
7 Pilot
8 Talk
Noble
Many planets are ruled by a class of nobles, and your 
hero was a member of one such exalted group. Such 
planets are often worlds of exquisite courtesy al -
loyed with utterly remorseless violence, and a mis -
placed word at the morning levee can result in an 
executioner’s monoblade at noon. Your hero has 
done something or been the victim of something to 
dislodge them from their comfortable place at court. 
Without their familiar allies, wealth, or influence, 
they must take a new place in the world, however 
distasteful that claiming might be.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Trade-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Any Combat
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
Trade-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Fix
Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Know
Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
7 Trade
8 Talk
Merchant
Your hero was or is a trader. Some merchants are 
mere peddlers and shopkeepers on primitive, low-
tech worlds, while others are daring far traders 
who venture to distant worlds to bring home their 
alien treasures. The nature of trade varies widely 
among worlds. On some of them, it’s a business of 
soberly-dressed men and women ticking off trades 
on virtual terminals, while on others it is a more… 
active pursuit, requiring the judicious application of 
monoblades and deniable gunfire against compet-
itors. Sometimes a deal goes bad or capital needs 
to be raised, and a merchant’s natural talents are 
turned toward the perils of adventure.
===== PAGE 17 =====
baCkgroundS •13 
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Pilot-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Connect
2  +2 Physical 2 Exert
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Fix
Pilot-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Notice
Fix-0 5 Connect 5 Pilot
Shoot or Trade-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
7 Shoot
8 Trade
Pilot
A pilot’s role is a broad one in the far future. The 
most glamorous and talented navigate starships 
through the metadimensional storms of interstellar 
space, while less admired figures fly the innumera-
ble intra-system shuttles and atmosphere craft that 
serve in most advanced systems. On other worlds, 
this career might reflect a long-haul trucker, or a 
horse-riding messenger, or an intrepid sailor on an 
alien sea. As the Pilot skill covers all these modes 
of transport, any character whose role revolves 
around vehicles or riding beasts might justify their 
selection of this career.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Heal-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Fix
Heal-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Heal
Know-0 5 Connect 5 Know
Notice-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
7 Talk
8 Trade
Physician
Bodies wear and break, even on worlds that pos-
sess the full resources of advanced postech medicine. 
Your hero was a physician, one trained to cure the 
maladies of the body or the afflictions of the mind. 
Some physicians are conventional health workers, 
while others are ship’s surgeons, military medics, 
missionary healers of an expanding faith, or dubi-
ous slum doctors who’ll graft over laser burns with 
no awkward questions asked. Wherever men and 
women go into danger, however, the skills of a phy-
sician are eagerly sought.
===== PAGE 18 =====
14• baCkgroundS
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Talk-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Connect
Talk-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Lead
Lead-0 5 Connect 5 Notice
Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
7 Talk
8 Talk
Politician
The nature of a political career varies from world 
to world. On some, it’s much like one we’d recog -
nize, with glad-handing voters, loud rallies, and 
quiet back room deals with supposed rivals in 
government. On others, it might involve a great 
deal more ceremonial combat, appeals to councils 
of elders, and success at ritual trials. Whatever the 
details, your hero was a politician in their home 
culture. Something went wrong, though, and the 
only way to fix it is to get clear of your constitu -
ents for a while and seek some alternative means 
of advancement.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Fix-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
Fix-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Fix
Pilot-0 5 Exert 5 Know
Program-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
7 Program
8 Talk
Spacer
Almost every advanced world is highly dependent 
upon the resources that space flight brings them. 
Some of this work can be automated, but every re-
ally important task needs a flexible human operator 
to oversee the work. Your hero is one such spacer, 
either a worker who toils in the sky or a native void-
born man or woman who has spent their entire 
life outside of natural gravity. It’s not uncommon 
for such workers to find better prospects in places 
where they can breathe without a vacc suit.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Know-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Fix
Know-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Know
Connect-0 5 Connect 5 Notice
Administer-0 6 Any Skill 6 Perform
7 Program
8 Talk
Scholar
Scientists, sages, and professors all qualify under 
this career. Your hero was one such, a man or 
woman with a life dedicated to knowledge and un-
derstanding. It might have involved the technical 
expertise of a metadimensional structures engineer 
or the sacred memorization of the chronicles of 
some lostworlder sage-order, but your hero’s life 
was in learning. Sometimes that learning cannot be 
found in familiar surroundings, however, and for 
one reason or another, willing or not, your hero 
must venture out into the wider world.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Any Combat-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Physical 2 Any Combat
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
Any Combat-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Fix
Exert-0 5 Exert 5 Lead
Survive-0 6 Any Skill 6 Notice
7 Sneak
8 Survive
Soldier
Whatever the technology or structure of their par-
ent world, a soldier’s work is universal. Your hero 
was a professional fighter, whether that took the 
form of a barbarian noble’s thegn, a faceless con -
script in a planetary army, or an elite soldier in the 
service of a megacorp’s private military. Whether it 
was because they were on the losing side, choosing 
to leave the service, or being forced to flee a cause 
they couldn’t fight for, they now find themselves 
navigating a world where their most salable skill 
is one that can cause them a great deal of trouble.
===== PAGE 19 =====
baCkgroundS •15 
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Fix-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Mental 3 Exert
Fix-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Fix
Exert-0 5 Connect 5 Fix
Notice-0 6 Any Skill 6 Know
7 Notice
8 Pilot
Technician
Old things break and new things need to be made. 
Whether a humble lostworlder blacksmith or an 
erudite astronautic engineer, your hero made a ca-
reer out of building and mending the fruits of tech-
nology. While almost every society has a need for 
such services, not all of them treat their providers as 
generously as a technician might wish. Sometimes, 
these same talents can be turned toward less licit 
ends, and a skilled technician’s expertise is always 
useful to an adventuring group that plans to rely on 
anything more sophisticated than a sharpened stick.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Work-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Administer
2  +1 Any Stat 2 Any Skill
Quick Skills 3  +1 Any Stat 3 Connect
Connect-0 4  +1 Any Stat 4 Exert
Exert-0 5 Exert 5 Fix
Work-0 6 Any Skill 6 Pilot
7 Program
8 Work
Worker
Countless in number, every industrialized world 
has swarms of workers to operate the machines and 
perform the labor that keeps society functioning. 
Cooks, factory laborers, mine workers, personal 
servants, lawyers, clerks, and innumerable other 
roles are covered under this career. If your hero 
rolls or picks Work as a skill but has a career that 
would better fit another existing skill, they may sub-
stitute it accordingly. Thus, a wage-slave program-
mer might take Program instead of Work, while a 
lawyer would use Administer instead as a reflection 
of their litigious talent.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Any Combat-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
2  +2 Mental 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Exert
Any Combat-0 4  +2 Physical 4 Notice
Talk-0 5 Connect 5 Sneak
Connect-0 6 Any Skill 6 Stab or Shoot
7 Survive
8 Talk
Thug
Your hero was a bruiser. They might have had a no-
tional allegiance to some so-called “army”, or have 
been part of some crime boss’ strong-arm crew, or 
simply been a private contractor of misfortune for 
those who failed to pay up. They might have even 
been a fist in a righteous cause, defending their 
neighborhood from hostile outsiders or serving as 
informal muscle for a local leader in need of pro -
tection. Whatever the details, they’ve had to move 
on from their old life, and their new one is likely to 
involve a similar application of directed force.
Free Skill d6 Growth d8 Learning
Survive-0 1  +1 Any Stat 1 Any Combat
2  +2 Physical 2 Connect
Quick Skills 3  +2 Physical 3 Notice
Survive-0 4  +2 Mental 4 Perform
Sneak-0 5 Exert 5 Pilot
Notice-0 6 Any Skill 6 Sneak
7 Survive
8 Work
Vagabond
A dilettante has money and friends; your hero sim -
ply has the road. Whether they were knocked loose 
from polite society at a young age or have recently 
found themselves cast out of a familiar life, they 
now roam the ways of the world and the spaces be-
tween. Some heroes find this life satisfying, with its 
constant novelty and the regular excitement of bare 
survival. Others long for a more stable arrangement, 
and are willing to lend their pragmatic talents to a 
group that offers some prospect of profit.
===== PAGE 20 =====
16• CharaCter ClaSSeS
CharaCTer Classes
In one way or another, your character is cut out for 
adventure. Your hero might be a veteran combatant, 
skilled with blade or laser, or they might be a psychic 
gifted with uncanny abilities. It’s just as possible that 
they could have remarkable talents as a pilot, or be 
the smoothest grifter in the hive-slum they grew up 
in. Whatever their particular background, your hero’s 
primary focus is their class.
Your class represents your hero’s best set of tools 
for dealing with their problems. They’re the skills and 
capabilities that they’re most likely to turn to to resolve 
a problem, but not their only tools. A Psychic can still 
shoot a gun and a Warrior can try to fast-talk a mark.
Choosing a class helps ensure that your hero is 
good at something that might contribute to a bold party 
of interstellar adventurers. Experts always have a knack 
at exercising non-combat skills, Warriors are always 
good in a scrap, and Psychics always have a unique 
power or two to employ at need. Your hero might have 
led a quiet life as a starport customs clerk until recently, 
but their natural talents will ensure that they can do 
something that the rest of the group will find useful.
In the same vein, you don’t have to choose a class 
that “naturally” fits with your background. That star -
port customs clerk might have led a peaceful life un -
troubled by anything worse than portside brawls, but 
inside her burns a seething, latent fury that is ready to 
explode at the first opportunity. She’s a Warrior, even 
though she might not realize her talents until the first 
time she snatches up a dropped laser rifle and unleashes 
a barrage of death on a pack of alien warbeasts. You 
should pick whatever class for your hero that matches 
the kind of play you want to have with them.
There are four possible classes you can choose for 
your hero: Adventurer, Expert, Psychic, and Warrior. 
Experts are PCs that rely on non-combat skills such as 
stealth, persuasion, technical expertise, piloting skills, 
vast learning, or personal connections. Psychics are 
those rare men and women affected by Metadimen -
sional Extroversion Syndrome, ones capable of chan -
neling these metadimensional energies to perform 
feats of telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and other 
psionic disciplines. Warriors are hardened combatants, 
skilled in the arts of war and violent conflict, and Ad-
venturers include those with a mix of talents and abili-
ties, ones who don’t fit well into one of the other classes.
Choose a class that best fits your character’s con-
cept. If Expert, Psychic, or Warrior don’t fit your image 
of your hero, or if you want to customize their abilities, 
you can choose the Adventurer class.
===== PAGE 21 =====
CharaCter ClaSSeS •1 7 
eXPerT
Your hero is exceptionally good at a useful skill. Doc-
tors, cat burglars, starship pilots, grifters, technicians, 
or any other concept that focuses on expertise in a 
non-combat skill should pick the Expert class. Experts 
are the best at such skills and gain more of them than 
other classes do.
Just as a Warrior can be relied upon to make a 
shot when the chips are down, an Expert has a knack 
for succeeding at the moments of greatest importance. 
Once per scene, an Expert can reroll a failed skill check, 
taking the new result if it’s better. This benefit can be 
applied to any skill check, even those that the Expert 
isn’t specially focused in. Their natural talent bleeds 
over into everything they do.
In their chosen field, however, the Expert is excep-
tionally gifted. Aside from the free focus level that all 
PCs get at the start of the game, an Expert can choose 
an additional level in a non-combat focus related to 
their background. They can spend both of these levels 
on the same focus if they wish, thus starting the game 
with level 2 in that particular knack.
Class Abilities
Every Expert PC has certain special abilities.
• You gain a free level in a non-combat focus relat-
ed to your background. Most concepts will take 
Specialist in their main skill, though Diplomat, Star-
farer, Healer, or some other focus might suit better. 
You may not take a combat-oriented focus with 
this perk. In case of uncertainty, the GM decides 
whether or not a focus is permitted.
• Once per scene, you can reroll a failed skill check, 
taking the new roll if it’s better.
• When you advance an experience level, you 
gain a bonus skill point that can be spent on any 
non-combat, non-psychic skill. You can save this 
point to spend later if you wish.
Hit Points and Attack Bonus
To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6 and 
add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 1 hit 
point. Your attack bonus is equal to half your character 
level, rounded down, so it’s +0 at first level.
PsyChIC
Your hero has received training in controlling their nat-
ural Metadimensional Extroversion Syndrome, and can 
wield the psychic powers that come from that strange 
affliction. Controlling and developing psychic abilities 
is an extremely demanding process but allows for feats 
wholly impossible to ordinary men and women.
Psychics are extremely rare in the general popula-
tion. Averages vary with worlds, but most range from 
one in ten thousand to one in a hundred thousand who 
have the MES condition that make them amenable to 
psychic training. Some of these go their entire lives 
without realizing their capabilities. Others end up ex-
ploiting their native abilities without training, almost 
inevitably ending up seriously brain-damaged or crazed 
by the effects of unmediated metadimensional energy.
Your hero has been fortunate enough to find a psy-
chic academy or other training institution capable of 
molding and directing these abilities. They may have 
come to this later in life, or been recruited young by a 
society that carefully watches for MES symptoms.
Some societies deal with their psychics more gen-
erously than others. On some worlds, psychic powers 
are accepted and their possessors can look forward to 
lucrative and respected employment. On others, fear of 
these uncanny powers and memories of the horrors of 
the Scream lead to less welcoming treatment.
Class Abilities
Every Psychic PC has certain special abilities.
• Unlike Warriors or Experts, you are capable of 
learning psychic disciplines and their associated 
techniques, as described starting on page 28. 
• When you pick this class, choose any two psychic 
skills as bonus skills. You can pick the same one 
twice to obtain level-1 proficiency in it and a free 
level-1 technique from that discipline.
• You have an Effort score, which can be used to 
fuel psychic abilities. Your maximum Effort is 
equal to 1 plus your highest psychic skill plus the 
better of your Wisdom or Constitution modifi -
ers. Even with a penalty, your maximum Effort 
cannot be lower than 1.
Hit Points and Attack Bonus
To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6 and 
add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 1 hit 
point. Your attack bonus is equal to half your character 
level, rounded down, so it’s +0 at first level.
===== PAGE 22 =====
1 8• CharaCter ClaSSeS
WarrIor
Whether a hiveworld thug, barbarian lostworlder, 
gengineered combat hominid, or a natural-born kill -
er wasting their potential in a desk job, your hero has 
a real talent for inflicting mayhem. Combat in Stars 
Without Number is extremely dangerous, but your hero 
has the talents to survive situations that would kill a 
less martial adventurer.
As a gifted purveyor of violence, you get to pick 
an extra combat-related focus associated with your 
special brand of havoc. While a character of any class 
can take these special combat talents, you get this ad-
ditional pick and a better natural hit bonus than heroes 
of other classes.
Most importantly, however, Warriors have an un-
canny gift for making a shot when a hit is desperately 
needed, or dodging a bullet when their life is on the 
line. Once per scene, a Warrior can either automati -
cally negate a successful combat hit they just received, 
taking no damage from it, or else they can turn one 
of their own missed attack rolls into an automatic hit. 
This versatility makes Warriors exceptionally danger -
ous enemies in a one-on-one fight, and significantly 
more likely to survive the gory chaos of a general melee.
Class Abilities
Every Warrior PC has certain special abilities.
• You gain a free level in a combat-related focus as-
sociated with your background. The GM decides 
if a focus qualifies if it’s an ambiguous case.
• Warriors are lucky in combat. Once per scene, as 
an Instant ability, you can either choose to ne -
gate a successful attack roll against you or turn a 
missed attack roll you made into a successful hit. 
You can use this ability after the dice are rolled, 
but it cannot be used against environmental dam-
age, effects without an attack roll, or hits on a 
vehicle you’re occupying.
• You gain two extra maximum hit points at each 
character level.
Hit Points and Attack Bonus
To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6+2 
and add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 
1 hit point. Your attack bonus is equal to your character 
level so it is +1 at first level.
adVenTurer
The Adventurer class is the catch-all for heroes who 
don’t fit so neatly into the other three categories. Per-
haps your mercenary spent her girlhood at a psychic 
academy, or maybe your combat medic knows more 
about using a laser rifle than most physicians do. You 
can use the Adventurer class to customize your hero’s 
abilities, trading focus for wider versatility.
Adventurers split their focus between different 
spheres, gaining weaker versions of each class’ ben -
efits. For example, an Adventurer who is a psionic 
warrior-adept might have considerable powers of 
telekinetic force and a brutal expertise at bare-handed 
combat, but they won’t have access to the wider psionic 
potential of an unrestricted Psychic or the death-defy-
ing combat luck of a hardened Warrior.
To define your Adventurer’s abilities, pick two of 
the following three partial classes.
Partial Expert
You gain a free level in a non-combat focus related to 
your background. Most concepts will take Specialist , 
though Diplomat, Starfarer, Healer, or some other focus 
might suit better. Gain an extra skill point every time 
you gain a character level which can be spent on any 
non-psychic, non-combat skill.
Partial Psychic
You are a restricted psychic. Pick one psychic discipline 
as a bonus skill at level-0. You can improve this skill 
with foci or skill points gained from advancing a level, 
but you cannot learn or improve any other psychic skill. 
Your maximum Effort equals 1 plus this psychic skill’s 
level plus the best of your Wisdom or Constitution 
modifiers, down to a minimum of 1.
Partial Warrior
You gain a free level in a combat focus related to your 
background. Gain +1 to your attack bonus at first and 
fifth levels. Gain 2 extra maximum hit points each level. 
Thus, at first level, you’d roll 1d6+2 for your maximum 
hit points. At second, you’d roll 2d6+4, and so forth.
Hit Points and Attack Bonus
To get your starting maximum hit points, roll 1d6 and 
add your Constitution modifier, to a minimum of 1 hit 
point. Adventurers who’ve taken the Partial Warrior 
option add 2 hit points to their maximum.
The base attack bonus for Adventurers is equal to 
half their character level, rounded down, so +0 at first 
level. If the PC has taken the Partial Warrior option 
their class bonus increases this to +1 at first level.
===== PAGE 23 =====
Choosing A Class and Focus
Basil Hayes needs a class. While an obvious pick 
would be Expert to match his background, Simon 
decides it would be more amusing to make him a 
soldier; specifically, the sniper “Basilisk” Hayes, the 
dire-eyed wraith of the cold Karelian forest. Given 
the complete lack of a market for his PhD and his 
own natural poor judgment, Basil signed up with 
a Karelian mercenary outfit. He’s just gotten out 
of his tour of duty, but at least now his skills are 
significantly more marketable.
While Simon could go with the Adventurer 
class for Basil and make him a Partial Warrior/
Partial Expert, he decides to make Basil a full-
fledged Warrior. His intellectual talents can be 
useful, but Basil’s main utility to the group is his 
ability to deal with combat situations.
Every PC gets to pick one focus of any kind, 
and a Warrior gets to pick one combat-related 
focus. Basil’s first choice is easy, as clearly he’s a 
Sniper, so he writes that down as a level 1 focus. 
Rather than taking a second level in that with his 
other pick, Simon decides to have Basil pick up 
a level of the Gunslinger focus. Basil will get the 
chance to pick more foci as he gains experience.
Each of these foci grant a bonus level in Shoot, 
so they stack together to give the young sniper a 
Shoot-1 skill. Basil’s now as deft with a rifle as he 
is with 19th century Terran Victorian poetry.
Lastly, Basil gets to pick any single non-psy -
chic skill of his choice as a hobby or natural talent. 
He decides that a sniper isn’t much of a sniper 
without being hard to spot, so picks Sneak-0 as his 
skill. This free skill pick is often useful for filling in 
the necessary talents of a concept that aren’t sup -
plied by the Learning table or bonus skills granted 
by a hero’s foci.
foCi •1 9 
ChoosIng a foCus
Every member of a class has certain baseline abilities 
that let them do well at their role. Warriors are always 
good combatants, Experts are always gifted with their 
skills, and Psychics always have a few pertinent psionic 
abilities. Aside from these baseline abilities, characters 
also have a focus.
A focus is an additional knack, perk, or aptitude 
that a hero has, one that grants them certain benefits 
in play. Each focus has one or more levels of increas -
ingly-strong effect. For example, someone with level 
1 in the Die Hard focus gains two extra maximum hit 
points each level and automatically stabilizes after a 
mortal wound, while someone with level 2 can negate 
the first injury they suffer each day that would inca -
pacitate or kill them. The benefits of a focus stack, so 
if you take level 2 in one, you get all the benefits from 
level 1 as well.
Any character can pick any focus, and it doesn’t 
have to “match” the class you selected. A Psychic can 
choose the Unarmed Combatant focus for fistic prow -
ess, while a Warrior might have enough experience 
with battlefield trauma to qualify as a Healer. The only 
obligation is that you explain how your hero picked 
up the training or exhibited their natural aptitude for 
the focus.
Many foci give a bonus level in a skill as part of 
their level 1 benefits. These bonus levels work like any 
other skill pick; they either give you the skill at lev -
el-0, raise an existing level-0 skill to level-1, or let you 
pick any other non-psychic skill if the skill is already 
at level-1.
Unless indicated otherwise a focus can be taken 
only once. Once you’ve taken level 1 of Die Hard, you 
can’t pick it again to get an additional two hit points per 
level. Some skill-oriented foci allow you to pick them 
more than once to apply to different skills.
Beginning PCs can pick one level of focus. PCs 
with the Expert class or the Partial Expert Adventur -
er class option can choose an additional level in any 
non-combat focus related to their background, in -
cluding level 2 in their initial choice. Most will choose 
Specialist, Healer, Diplomat, or some other similar focus, 
but the GM can allow other non-combat foci. PCs with 
the Warrior class or the Partial Warrior Adventurer 
class option can do the same in choosing an additional 
combat-related focus.
As your hero advances in experience, you’ll get the 
opportunity to pick up new foci or improve existing 
ones as you refine your talents or learn new tricks. In 
some cases, you might work with the GM to come up 
with a custom focus reflecting your PC’s specific special 
talent or a perk that makes sense given their recent 
adventures. Foci are an important part of a hero’s char-
acter, and they should always reflect something basic 
about how they tend to interact with the world.
Origin Foci
If you include aliens or robots in your campaign, you 
can represent them with origin foci. Origin foci are 
taken the same way as any other foci, and may be pur-
chased with a beginning character’s focus level. 
If a GM is feeling generous, they can allow a PC 
to take a level in an origin focus as well as their usual 
free focus level, in order to allow a hero to start as an 
alien with some additional knack. A PC who takes this 
option doesn’t get their usual bonus focus at level 2; 
they’ve already spent it on being unusual.
Origin foci for robotic VIs are on page 199. Avail-
able alien races will vary with the campaign setting, but 
details on making these race are on page 209.
===== PAGE 24 =====
20• foCi
The foCus lIsT
Alert
You are keenly aware of your surroundings and virtual-
ly impossible to take unaware. You have an instinctive 
alacrity of response that helps you act before less wary 
persons can think to move.
Level 1: Gain Notice as a bonus skill. You cannot be 
surprised, nor can others use the Execution Attack 
option on you. When you roll initiative, roll twice 
and take the best result.
Level 2: You always act first in a combat round unless 
someone else involved is also this Alert. 
Armsman
You have an unusual competence with thrown weap -
ons and melee attacks. This focus’ benefits do not apply 
to unarmed attacks or projectile weapons. For thrown 
weapons, you can’t use the benefits of the Armsman 
focus at the same time as Gunslinger.
Level 1: Gain Stab as a bonus skill. You can draw or 
sheath a Stowed melee or thrown weapon as an 
Instant action. You may add your Stab skill level to 
a melee or thrown weapon’s damage roll or Shock 
damage, assuming it has any to begin with.
Level 2: Your primitive melee and thrown weapons 
count as TL4 weapons for the purpose of over -
coming advanced armors. Even on a miss with a 
melee weapon, you do an unmodified 1d4 damage 
to the target, plus any Shock damage. This bonus 
damage doesn’t apply to thrown weapons or at -
tacks that use the Punch skill.
Assassin
You are practiced at sudden murder, and have certain 
advantages in carrying out an Execution Attack as de-
scribed in the rules on page 52. 
Level 1: Gain Sneak as a bonus skill. You can conceal an 
object no larger than a knife or pistol from any -
thing less invasive than a strip search, including 
normal TL4 weapon detection devices. You can 
draw or produce this object as an On Turn action, 
and your point-blank ranged attacks made from 
surprise with it cannot miss the target.
Level 2: You can take a Move action on the same round 
as you make an Execution Attack, closing rapidly 
with a target before you attack. You may split this 
Move action when making an Execution Attack, 
taking part of it before you murder your target 
and part of it afterwards. This movement happens 
too quickly to alert a victim or to be hindered by 
bodyguards, barring an actual physical wall of 
meat between you and your prey.
Authority
You have an uncanny kind of charisma about you, one 
that makes others instinctively follow your instructions 
and further your causes. At level 1, this is a knack of 
charm and personal magnetism, while level 2 might 
suggest latent telepathic influence or transhuman me-
metic hacking augmentations. Where this focus refers 
to followers, it means NPCs who have voluntarily cho-
sen to be in your service. PCs never count as followers.
Level 1: Gain Lead as a bonus skill. Once per day, you 
can make a request from an NPC who is not open-
ly hostile to you, rolling a Cha/Lead skill check at 
a difficulty of the NPC’s Morale score. If you suc -
ceed, they will comply with the request, provided 
it is not harmful or extremely uncharacteristic.
Level 2: Those who follow you are fired with confi -
dence. Any NPC being directly led by you gains a 
Morale and hit roll bonus equal to your Lead skill 
and a +1 bonus on all skill checks. Your followers 
will not act against your interests unless under 
extreme pressure.
Close Combatant
You’ve had all too much practice at close-in fighting 
and desperate struggles with pistol or blade. You’re ex-
tremely skilled at avoiding injury in melee combat, and 
at level 2 you can dodge through a melee scrum without 
fear of being knifed in passing.
Level 1: Gain any combat skill as a bonus skill. You can 
use pistol-sized ranged weapons in melee with -
out suffering penalties for the proximity of melee 
attackers. You ignore Shock damage from melee 
assailants, even if you’re unarmored at the time.
Level 2: The Shock damage from your melee attacks 
treats all targets as if they were AC 10. The Fight-
ing Withdrawal combat action is treated as an On 
Turn action for you and can be performed freely.
Connected
You’re remarkably gifted at making friends and forging 
ties with the people around you. Wherever you go, you 
always seem to know somebody useful to your ends.
Level 1: Gain Connect as a bonus skill. If you’ve spent 
at least a week in a not-entirely-hostile location, 
you’ll have built a web of contacts willing to do 
favors for you that are no more than mildly illegal. 
You can call on one favor per game day and the 
GM decides how far they’ll go for you.
Level 2: Once per game session, if it’s not entirely im-
plausible, you meet someone you know who is 
willing to do modest favors for you. You can de-
cide when and where you want to meet this per-
son, but the GM decides who they are and what 
they can do for you.
===== PAGE 25 =====
foCi •21 
Die Hard 
You are surprisingly hard to kill. You can survive inju-
ries or bear up under stresses that would incapacitate a 
less determined hero.
Level 1: You gain an extra 2 maximum hit points per 
level. This bonus applies retroactively if you take 
this focus after first level. You automatically stabi-
lize if mortally wounded by anything smaller than 
a Heavy weapon.
Level 2: The first time each day that you are reduced to 
zero hit points by an injury, you instead survive 
with one hit point remaining. This ability can’t 
save you from Heavy weapons or similar trauma.
Diplomat
You know how to get your way in personal negotia -
tions, and can manipulate the attitudes of those around 
you. Even so, while smooth words are versatile, they’ll 
only work if your interlocutor is actually willing to 
listen to you.
Level 1: Gain Talk as a bonus skill. You speak all the lan-
guages common to the sector and can learn new 
ones to a workable level in a week, becoming flu-
ent in a month. Reroll 1s on any skill check dice 
related to negotiation or diplomacy.
Level 2: Once per game session, shift an intelligent 
NPC’s reaction roll one step closer to friendly if 
you can talk to them for at least thirty seconds.
Gunslinger
You have a gift with a gun. While this talent most com-
monly applies to slugthrowers or energy weapons, it 
is also applicable to thrown weapons, bows, or other 
ranged weapons that can be used with the Shoot skill. 
For thrown weapons, you can’t use the benefits of the 
Armsman focus at the same time as Gunslinger.
Level 1: Gain Shoot as a bonus skill. You can draw or 
holster a Stowed ranged weapon as an On Turn 
action. You may add your Shoot skill level to a 
ranged weapon’s damage roll.
Level 2: Once per round, you can reload a ranged weap-
on as an On Turn action if it takes no more than 
one round to reload. Even on a miss with a Shoot 
attack, you do an unmodified 1d4 damage.
Hacker
You have a considerable fluency with digital security 
measures and standard encryption methods. You know 
how to make computerized systems obey you until 
their automatic failsafes come down on your control.
Level 1: Gain Program as a bonus skill. When attempt -
ing to hack a database or computerized system, 
roll 3d6 on the skill check and drop the lowest die.
Level 2: Your hack duration increases to 1d4+Program 
skill x 10 minutes. You have an instinctive under-
standing of the tech; you never need to learn the 
data protocols for a strange system and are always 
treated as familiar with it.
Healer
Healing comes naturally to you, and you’re particularly 
gifted at preventing the quick bleed-out of wounded 
allies and comrades.
Level 1: Gain Heal as a bonus skill. You may attempt to 
stabilize one mortally-wounded adjacent person 
per round as an On Turn action. When rolling 
Heal skill checks, roll 3d6 and drop the lowest die.
Level 2: Stims or other technological healing devices 
applied by you heal twice as many hit points as 
normal. Using only basic medical supplies, you 
can heal 1d6+Heal skill hit points of damage to 
every injured or wounded person in your group 
with ten minutes of first aid spread among them. 
Such healing can be applied to a given target only 
once per day.
Henchkeeper
You have an distinct knack for picking up lost souls 
who willingly do your bidding. You might induce them 
with promises of money, power, excitement, sex, or 
some other prize that you may or may not eventually 
grant. A henchman obtained with this focus will serve 
in loyal fashion until clearly betrayed or placed in unac-
ceptable danger. Henchmen are not “important” people 
in their society, and are usually marginal sorts, outcasts, 
the desperate, or other persons with few options.
You can use more conventional pay or induce -
ments to acquire additional henchmen, but these extra 
hirelings are no more loyal or competent than your pay 
and treatment can purchase.
Level 1: Gain Lead as a bonus skill. You can acquire 
henchmen within 24 hours of arriving in a com-
munity, assuming anyone is suitable hench mate-
rial. These henchmen will not fight except to save 
their own lives, but will escort you on adventures 
and risk great danger to help you. Most hench -
men will be treated as Peaceful Humans from the 
Xenobestiary section of the book. You can have 
one henchmen at a time for every three charac -
ter levels you have, rounded up. You can release 
henchmen with no hard feelings at any plausible 
time and pick them back up later should you be 
without a current henchman.
Level 2: Your henchmen are remarkably loyal and 
determined, and will fight for you against any -
thing but clearly overwhelming odds. Whether 
through natural competence or their devotion 
to you, they’re treated as Martial Humans from 
the Xenobestiary section. You can make faithful 
henchmen out of skilled and highly-capable NPCs, 
but this requires that you actually have done them 
some favor or help that would reasonably earn 
such fierce loyalty.
===== PAGE 26 =====
22• foCi
Ironhide
Whether through uncanny reflexes, remarkable luck, 
gengineered skin fibers, or subtle telekinetic shielding, 
you have natural defenses equivalent to high-quality 
combat armor. The benefits of this focus don’t stack 
with armor, though Dexterity or shield modifiers apply.
Level 1: You have an innate Armor Class of 15 plus half 
your character level, rounded up.
Level 2: Your abilities are so effective that they render 
you immune to unarmed attacks or primitive 
weaponry as if you wore powered armor.
Psychic Training
You’ve had special training in a particular psychic disci-
pline. You must be a Psychic or have taken the Partial 
Psychic class option as an Adventurer to pick this focus. 
In the latter case, you can only take training in the dis-
cipline you initially chose as a Partial Psychic. As with 
most foci, this focus can be taken only once.
Level 1: Gain any psychic skill as a bonus. If this im -
proves it to level-1 proficiency, choose a free lev-
el-1 technique from that discipline. Your maxi -
mum Effort increases by one. 
Level 2: When you advance a level, the bonus psychic 
skill you chose for the first level of the focus auto-
matically gets one skill point put toward increas -
ing it or purchasing a technique from it. You may 
save these points for later, if more are required to 
raise the skill or buy a particular technique. These 
points are awarded retroactively if you take this 
focus level later in the game.
Savage Fray
You are a whirlwind of bloody havoc in melee combat, 
and can survive being surrounded far better than most 
combatants.
Level 1: Gain Stab as a bonus skill. All enemies adjacent 
to you at the end of your turn whom you have not 
attacked suffer the Shock damage of your weapon 
if their Armor Class is not too high to be affected.
Level 2: After suffering your first melee hit in a round, 
any further melee attacks from other assailants au-
tomatically miss you. If the attacker who hits you 
has multiple attacks, they may attempt all of them, 
but other foes around you simply miss.
Shocking Assault
You’re extremely dangerous to enemies around you. 
The ferocity of your melee attacks stresses and distracts 
enemies even when your blows don’t draw blood.
Level 1: Gain Punch or Stab as a bonus skill. The Shock 
damage of your weapon treats all targets as if they 
were AC 10, assuming your weapon is capable of 
harming the target in the first place.
Level 2: In addition, you gain a +2 bonus to the Shock 
damage rating of all melee weapons and unarmed 
attacks. Regular hits never do less damage than 
this Shock would do on a miss.
Sniper
You are an expert at placing a bullet or beam on an 
unsuspecting target. These special benefits only apply 
when making an Execution Attack with a firearm or 
bow, as described on page 52.
Level 1: Gain Shoot as a bonus skill. When making 
a skill check for an Execution Attack or target 
shooting, roll 3d6 and drop the lowest die.
Level 2: A target hit by your Execution Attack takes a 
-4 penalty on the Physical saving throw to avoid 
immediate mortal injury. Even if the save is suc -
cessful, the target takes double the normal damage 
inflicted by the attack.
Specialist
You are remarkably talented at a particular skill. Wheth-
er a marvelous cat burglar, a world-famous athlete, a 
brilliant engineer, or some other savant, your expertise 
is extremely reliable. You may take this focus more than 
once for different skills.
Level 1: Gain a non-combat, non-psychic skill as a bonus. 
Roll 3d6 and drop the lowest die for all skill checks 
in this skill.
Level 2: Roll 4d6 and drop the two lowest dice for all 
skill checks in this skill.
Star Captain
You have a tremendous natural talent for ship combat, 
and can make any starship you captain a significantly 
more fearsome opponent. You must take the captain’s 
role during a fight as described on page 117 of the Ship 
Combat rules in order to benefit from this focus.
Level 1: Gain Lead as a bonus skill. Your ship gains 2 
extra Command Points at the start of each turn.
Level 2: A ship you captain gains bonus hit points equal 
to 20% of its maximum at the start of each com-
bat. Damage is taken from these bonus points first, 
and they vanish at the end of the fight and do not 
require repairs to replenish before the next. In ad-
dition, once per engagement, you may resolve a 
Crisis as an Instant action by explaining how your 
leadership resolves the problem.
Starfarer
You are an expert in the plotting and execution of inter-
stellar spike drills. While most experienced pilots can 
manage conventional drills along well-charted spike 
routes, you have the knack for forging new drill paths 
and cutting courses too dangerous for lesser navigators.
Level 1: Gain Pilot as a bonus skill. You automatically 
succeed at all spike drill-related skill checks of dif-
ficulty 10 or less.
Level 2: Double your Pilot skill for all spike drill-relat-
ed skill checks. Spike drives of ships you navigate 
are treated as one level higher; thus, a drive-1 is 
treated as a drive-2, up to a maximum of drive-7. 
Spike drills you personally oversee take only half 
the time they would otherwise require.
===== PAGE 27 =====
foCi •23 
Tinker
You have a natural knack for modifying and improving 
equipment, as given in the rules on page 100.
Level 1: Gain Fix as a bonus skill. Your Maintenance 
score is doubled, allowing you to maintain twice 
as many mods. Both ship and gear mods cost only 
half their usual price in credits, though pretech 
salvage requirements remain the same.
Level 2: Your Fix skill is treated as one level higher for 
purposes of building and maintaining mods and 
calculating your Maintenance score. Advanced 
mods require one fewer pretech salvage part to 
make, down to a minimum of zero.
Unarmed Combatant
Your empty hands are more dangerous than knives 
and guns in the grip of the less gifted. Your unarmed 
attacks are counted as melee weapons when it comes to 
binding up opponents wielding rifles and similar long 
arms, though you need at least one hand free to do so.
Level 1: Gain Punch as a bonus skill. Your unarmed 
attacks become more dangerous as your Punch 
skill increases. At level-0, they do 1d6 damage. At 
level-1, they do 1d8 damage. At level-2 they do 
1d10, level-3 does 1d12, and level-4 does 1d12+1. 
At Punch-1 or better, they have the Shock quality 
equal to your Punch skill against AC 15 or less. 
While you normally add your Punch skill level to 
any unarmed damage, don’t add it twice to this 
Shock damage.
Level 2: You know locks and twists that use powered 
servos against their wearer. Your unarmed attacks 
count as TL4 weapons for the purpose of over -
coming advanced armors. Even on a miss with a 
Punch attack, you do an unmodified 1d6 damage.
Unique Gift
Whether due to exotic technological augmentation, a 
unique transhuman background, or a remarkable hu -
man talent, you have the ability to do something that’s 
simply impossible for a normal human.
This is a special focus which serves as a catch-all 
for some novel power or background perk that doesn’t 
have a convenient fit in the existing rules. A transhu -
man who can function normally in lethal environments, 
a nanotech-laden experimental subject with a head full 
of exotic sensors, or a brilliant gravitic scientist who 
can fly thanks to their personal tech might all take this 
focus to cover their special abilities.
It’s up to the GM to decide what’s reasonable and 
fair to be covered under this gift. If an ability is particu-
larly powerful, it might require the user to take System 
Strain to use it, as described on page 32.
As a general rule this ability should be better than 
a piece of gear the PC could buy for credits. The player 
is spending a very limited resource when they make 
this focus pick, so what they get should be good enough 
that they can’t just duplicate it with a fat bank account.
Wanderer
Your hero gets around. As part of a life on the road, 
they’ve mastered a number of tricks for ensuring their 
mobility and surviving the inevitable difficulties of a 
vagabond existence.
Level 1: Gain Survive as a bonus skill. You can convey 
basic ideas in all the common languages of the 
sector. You can always find free transport to a de-
sired destination for yourself and a small group of 
your friends provided any traffic goes to the place. 
Finding this transport takes no more than an hour, 
but it may not be a strictly legitimate means of 
travel and may require working passage.
Level 2: You can forge, scrounge, or snag travel papers 
and identification for the party with 1d6 hours 
of work. These papers and permits will stand up 
to ordinary scrutiny, but require an opposed Int/
Administer versus Wis/Notice check if examined 
by an official while the PC is actually wanted by 
the state for some crime. When finding transport 
for the party, the transportation always makes the 
trip at least as fast as a dedicated charter would.
Wild Psychic Talent
Some men and women are born with a very limited 
form of MES, the mental condition that allows for the 
use of psychic powers. While these people are not true 
psychics, these “wild talents” can create one limited psy-
chic effect. Training is not always required to develop 
this ability, and their MES is so mild that they don’t 
suffer the risk of madness or brain damage that more 
developed psychics risk should they use their powers 
without proper training.
Wild talents are not treated as psychics for gen -
eral purposes and cannot “torch” their powers. When 
relevant, they are treated as having one point of Effort. 
Psychics and Partial Psychics cannot take this focus.
Level 1: Pick a psychic discipline. You gain an ability 
equivalent to the level-0 core power of that disci-
pline. Optionally, you may instead pick a level-1 
technique from that discipline, but that tech -
nique must stand alone; you can’t pick one that 
augments another technique or core ability. For 
example, you could pick the Telekinetic Armory 
technique from Telekinesis, because that ability 
does not require the use of any other Telekine -
sis power. You could not pick the Mastered Succor 
ability from Biopsionics, because that technique is 
meant to augment another power you don’t have.
Level 2: You now have a maximum Effort of two points. 
You may pick a second ability according to the 
guidelines above. This second does not need to be 
a stand-alone technique if it augments the power 
you chose for level 1 of this focus. Thus, if your 
first pick was gaining the level-0 power of Psychic 
Succor, your second could be Mastered Succor. You 
still could not get the level-1 core power of Psychic 
Succor, however, as you’re still restricted to level-0.
===== PAGE 28 =====
PCs and Languages
The standard language of the late Terran Mandate 
was a highly hybridized version of English. All PCs 
are assumed to speak “Mandate” unless they’ve got 
a very good reason not to, and will rapidly pick up 
enough to get by otherwise.
PCs also speak all the languages appropri -
ate to their background and history. A native 
of a French-speaking world will naturally speak 
French, or whatever French is in 3200 AD.
Linguist PCs with the Know skill know addi-
tional languages; one more at level-0, three more 
at level-1, six more at level-2, ten more at level-3, 
and all sector-known languages at level-4. PCs 
who are far-traveled or versed in dealing with 
other cultures may substitute Connect instead of 
Know to determine their bonus languages.
24• final touCheS
fInal TouChes
You’re almost finished. Just a few more things to note 
down, and you’ll have an adventurer ready for play.
First, pick one more non-psychic skill of your 
choice. This pick represents your hobbies, your side 
interests, or some well of natural talent. You gain it at 
level-0 if you don’t already have it. Otherwise, it stacks 
to increase the skill to level-1. You can’t pick a skill you 
already have at level-1.
Next, determine your maximum hit points. Your 
hit points are a measure of how close you are to death 
or defeat; when you run out of them, your character is 
dead or unable to continue fighting. You can regain lost 
hit points by rest and biopsionic healing, but they can-
not exceed their maximum. Your maximum hit points 
are equal to 1d6 plus your Constitution modifier, down 
to a minimum of 1 hit point. Warriors and Adventur -
ers with the Partial Warrior class option can add a +2 
bonus to this total.
Now note down your base attack bonus. For most 
PCs, this is equal to half your character level, rounded 
down, so it’s +0 for most characters. If your hero is a 
Warrior or an Adventurer with the Partial Warrior 
class option, your beginning base attack bonus is +1.
Record your Physical, Mental, and Evasion saving 
throws. Your Physical saving throw is 15 minus the 
better of your Strength or Constitution attribute mod-
ifiers. Your Mental saving throw is 15 minus the better 
of your Wisdom or Charisma attribute modifiers. Your 
Evasion saving throw is 15 minus the better of your 
Dexterity or Intelligence attribute modifiers. If you 
have a penalty in both modifiers, it’s possible to have a 
saving throw of 16 or more.
Lastly, either choose an equipment package from 
the list on the opposite page or roll 2d6 x 100 to find out 
how many credits you have to buy your beginning gear.
===== PAGE 29 =====
final touCheS •25 
equIPmenT PaCkages
Rather than choosing gear from the Equipment chap -
ter, you can just take a premade package from this page 
instead of taking your starting credits.
Once you’ve chosen your equipment, make sure to 
note down the damage and hit bonus of your weapons, 
and the Armor Class of any armor you have.
For weapons, your hit bonus is your base attack 
bonus plus your applicable skill, plus the attribute mod-
ifier used by the weapon. For ranged weapons, this 
is usually Dexterity, while most melee weapons are 
Strength or Dexterity. Ranged energy weapons add +1 
to this, as they lack recoil or windage. Damage is equal 
to the weapon’s damage die plus the attribute modifier.
For armor, your total Armor Class is that of your 
armor plus your Dexterity modifier. Multiple suits of 
armor do not stack together.
Gunslinger
Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 8 type A Cells
Armored Undersuit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)
Monoblade Knife (1d6 damage) Compad
100 credits
Soldier
Combat Rifle (1d12 damage) 80 rounds ammo
Woven Body Armor (AC 15) Backpack (TL0)
Knife (1d4 damage) Compad
100 credits
Scout
Laser Rifle (1d10 damage) 8 type A cells
Armored vacc suit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)
Knife (1d4 damage) Compad
Survey scanner 25 credits
Survival kit
Binoculars (TL 3)
Medic
Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) Backpack (TL0)
Secure Clothing (AC 13) Medkit
4 Lazarus patches Compad
2 doses of Lift Bioscanner
25 credits
Civilian
Secure Clothing (AC 13) Compad
700 credits
Technician
Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 4 type A cells
Armored Undersuit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)
Monoblade knife (1d6 damage) Dataslab
Postech toolkit Metatool
6 units of spare parts 200 credits
Barbarian
Spear (1d6+1 damage) Backpack (TL0)
Primitive hide armor (AC 13) 7 days rations
Primitive shield (+1 AC) 20m rope
Knife (1d4 damage) 500 credits
Blade
Monoblade sword (1d8+1 dmg) Backpack (TL0)
Woven Body Armor (AC 15) Compad
Secure Clothing (AC 13) Lazarus patch
Thermal knife (1d6 damage) 50 credits
Thief
Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 2 type A cells
Armored Undersuit (AC 13) Backpack (TL0)
Monoblade knife (1d6 damage) Compad
Climbing harness Metatool
Low-light goggles 25 credits
Hacker
Laser Pistol (1d6 damage) 2 type A cells
Secure Clothing (AC 13) Dataslab
Postech toolkit Metatool
3 units of spare parts 2 line shunts
100 credits
===== PAGE 30 =====
26• QuiCk CharaCter Creation
If you picked or rolled the Psychic class, roll twice on 
the table to the left to find out what psychic disciplines 
you’ve trained to level-0. If you roll or pick the same 
one twice, it’s level-1, and you should pick a free level-1 
technique from the Psionics chapter on page 28.
Take a minute to decide where you were trained 
to safely use your innate powers. If you’re not sure, ask 
the GM which psychic academy makes the most sense.
Next, it’s time to pick or roll from the background table 
to the right. Don’t worry if it doesn’t seem to fit your 
class; if your Melee Warrior happens to roll a past as 
a Scholar, just take a moment to decide why it is that 
an erudite scientist might also have a savage left hook. 
You can switch around your attributes if you want to 
make things fit more closely, such as swapping your 
Intelligence and Charisma in the case above.
The background options are general concepts as 
described starting on page 10. Your hero might be 
a model example of their type, or you might shuffle 
around their details a little, deciding your Ranged War-
rior Official is an ex-cop bounced out of the force after 
investigating an alien smuggling ring a little too closely.
Once you’ve rolled or chosen your background, 
note down the three skills listed with it. If one of the 
skills says “Any Combat”, choose either Punch, Shoot, 
or Stab depending on what fits best for your hero.
You’ll want to decide on your homeworld at this 
point too. If you’re not familiar with the campaign 
setting, describe your hero’s background and ask the 
GM which planet they’re most likely from. The GM 
can then fill you in on any important cultural or social 
details that might’ve influenced your hero’s history.
quICk CharaCTer CreaTIon
If you don’t have the time or inclination to do things 
the leisurely way, you can use these pages to quickly 
roll up a hero. You can either pick or roll from any of 
the tables to get a character that suits.
The first step is to roll on the class table below. This will 
give you your class, your attributes, the hit point die to 
roll, and your attack bonus. Each class “style” hints at 
the kind of PC those attributes might describe.
d8 Class and Style Str Dex Con Int Wis Cha HP Atk. Bon.
1 Expert (Smart) 10 (+0) 12 (+0) 11 (+0) 14 (+1) 7 (-1) 9 (+0) 1d6 +0
2 Expert (Smooth) 7 (-1) 9 (+0) 10 (+0) 12 (+0) 11 (+0) 14 (+1) 1d6 +0
3 Expert (Nimble) 10 (+0) 14 (+1) 12 (+0) 11 (+0) 9 (+0) 7 (-1) 1d6 +0
4 Warrior (Melee) 14 (+1) 9 (+0) 12 (+0) 7 (-1) 10 (+0) 11 (+0) 1d6+2 +1
5 Warrior (Ranged) 9 (+0) 14 (+1) 12 (+0) 10 (+0) 7 (-1) 11 (+0) 1d6+2 +1
6 Warrior (Leader) 7 (-1) 10 (+0) 9 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+0) 14 (+1) 1d6+2 +1
7 Psychic (Seer) 9 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+0) 10 (+0) 14 (+1) 7 (-1) 1d6 +0
8 Psychic (Adept) 12 (+0) 10 (+0) 14 (+1) 9 (+0) 11 (+0) 7 (-1) 1d6+1 +0
d20 Background Skills
1 Barbarian Survive-0, Notice-0, Any Combat-0
2 Clergy Talk-0, Perform-0, Know-0
3 Courtesan Perform-0, Notice-0, Connect-0
4 Criminal Connect-0, Sneak-0, Talk-0
5 Dilettante Connect-0. Know-0, Talk-0
6 Entertainer Perform-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
7 Merchant Trade-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
8 Noble Lead-0, Connect-0, Administer-0
9 Official Administer-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
10 Peasant Exert-0, Sneak-0, Survive-0
11 Physician Heal-0, Know-0, Notice-0
12 Pilot Pilot-0, Fix-0, Shoot or Trade-0
13 Politician Talk-0, Lead-0, Connect-0
14 Scholar Know-0, Administer-0, Connect-0
15 Soldier Any Combat-0, Exert-0, Survive-0
16 Spacer Fix-0, Pilot-0, Program-0
17 Technician Fix-0, Notice-0, Exert-0
18 Thug Any Combat-0, Talk-0, Connect-0
19 Vagabond Notice-0, Sneak-0, Survive-0
20 Worker Connect-0, Exert-0, Work-0
d6 Psychic Skill
1 Biopsionics-0, the art of healing and metamorphosis
2 Metapsionics-0, the art of manipulating psychic power
3 Precognition-0, the art of sensing the future
4 Telekinesis-0, the art of controlling kinetic energy
5 Telepathy-0, the art of reading and influencing thought
6 Teleportation-0, the art of instant translocation
===== PAGE 31 =====
QuiCk CharaCter Creation •27 
Now it’s time for a few final touches.
Pick or roll a bonus skill. You can use the table to 
the right or just choose any non-psychic skill to add at 
level-0 to your hero. You can pick a skill you already 
have at level-0 to make it level-1 instead.
If you’re playing a Psychic, note down your begin-
ning maximum Effort, which is equal to 1 plus your 
highest psychic skill plus the better of your Wisdom 
or Constitution modifiers.
Write down your saving throws. Your Physi -
cal saving throw is equal to 15 minus your Strength 
or Constitution modifiers, whichever is better. Your 
Evasion saving throw is equal to 15 minus the better 
of your Dexterity or Intelligence modifiers, and your 
Mental saving throw is 15 minus the better of your 
Wisdom or Charisma modifiers.
Pick your starting equipment, either rolling 2d6 
x 100 to find your beginning credit total or picking a 
package from page 25. Note down your beginning hit 
bonus totals and damage for any weapons you have, 
and the Armor Class total for any armor you wear.
Finally, put a name on this budding hero and 
choose their initial goal. What are they trying to ac -
complish right now? Get rich? Get off their tedious 
homeworld? Take revenge on a local tyrant? Whatever 
you pick should be something that motivates your hero 
from the very start, and it should also be something that 
complements the interests of the rest of the players. 
Nobody’s going to thank you if you roll up a PC that 
none of the other party members would want to asso -
ciate with, or one that can’t be expected to play nicely 
with the rest of the group. 
Class 1 2 3 4 5 6
Expert (Smart) Specialist/Fix
Die Hard
Hacker
Tinker
Specialist/Know
Healer
Specialist/Fix
Tinker
Healer
Ironhide
Specialist/Fix
Hacker
Expert (Smooth) Diplomat
Connected
Specialist/Talk
Die Hard
Diplomat
Alert
Specialist/Lead
Authority
Healer
Specialist/Talk
Specialist/Notice
Specialist/Talk
Expert (Nimble) Specialist/Pilot
Starfarer
Healer
Die Hard
Tinker
Gunslinger
Specialist/Sneak
Assassin
Specialist/Sneak
Specialist/Exert
Specialist/Entertain
Specialist/Sneak
Warrior (Melee) Savage Fray
Shocking Assault
Assassin
Specialist/Sneak
Armsman
Close Combatant
Close Combatant
Savage Fray
Ironhide
Die Hard
Unarmed Combatant
Close Combatant
Warrior (Ranged) Gunslinger
Close Combatant
Sniper
Specialist/Sneak
Assassin
Specialist/Sneak
Ironhide
Die Hard
Gunslinger
Tinker
Close Combat
Alert
Warrior (Leader) Gunslinger
Authority
Ironhide
Connected
Armsman
Specialist/Lead
Gunslinger
Specialist/Talk
Assassin
Die Hard
Close Combatant
Henchkeeper
Psychic (Seer) Alert Healer Specialist/Notice Psychic Training Savage Fray Hacker
Psychic (Adept) Armsman Ironhide Die Hard Psychic Training Healer Unarmed Combatant
Now roll 1d6 or pick from the table below to get ap -
propriate foci for your hero, assuming you’d rather not 
pick freely. All the foci listed below are gained at level 1 
proficiency and are described starting on page 20. Psy-
chics can pick one focus. The other classes get one free 
pick, plus one more combat focus for Warriors and one 
more non-combat focus for Experts.
When you choose a focus, you might get a bonus 
skill from it. If you don’t have that skill, you gain it at 
level-0. If you have it at level-0, it becomes level-1. And 
if you already have it at level-1, pick any other non-psy-
chic skill instead that isn’t already level-1.
The focus you pick or roll tells you a lot about your 
hero’s past. A smooth Expert who’s a Connected Dip-
lomat might have been an underworld fixer, while a 
Healer with Specialization in Talk could have been a 
psychiatrist or therapist. Take a moment to figure out 
how your hero’s foci reflect their past experience.
d20 Bonus Skill
1 Administer: bureaucracy and management
2 Connect: knowing people and cultures
3 Exert: climbing, running, throwing, and such
4 Fix: repairing and building things
5 Heal: curing harm in mind and body
6 Know: scientific and academic knowledge
7 Lead: persuade others to do as you are doing
8 Notice: spot things and detect the unusual
9 Perform: sing, dance, act, and the like
10 Pilot: fly ships, ride beasts, sail boats
11 Program: hack computers, run comms
12 Punch: fight unarmed
13 Shoot: fight at range
14 Sneak: defeat security and avoid notice
15 Stab: fight with melee weapons
16 Survive: avoid natural peril, find food
17 Talk: persuade others to believe things
18 Trade: buy, sell, and find vendors of things
19 Work: a job or talent not covered above
20 Change a level-0 skill you have to level-1
===== PAGE 32 =====

===== PAGE 33 =====
PSIONICS
Psionic powers first manifested centuries ago in the 
wake of the first interstellar flights. Later paraphysi -
cists speculated that something about the exposure to 
metadimensional energies incurred in spike drive trav-
el changed these spacers, altering genomes or warping 
their energy shadows in a way that changed their even-
tual offspring. While this theory was never completely 
proven, it was demonstrated that psionic powers were 
far more prevalent on the frontier, in people who were 
descended of starfaring ancestors, than they were on 
Old Terra. On most frontier worlds about one in ten 
thousand children are born with psychic aptitude, 
while Old Terra displayed only a tenth of that incidence.
Psychic abilities initially seemed to be a congenital 
curse, one known as “Metadimensional Extroversion 
Syndrome”, or MES. Children manifested MES in pu-
berty or early adulthood, after certain critical stages of 
brain development opened a channel between their 
minds and the churning maelstrom of energies that 
boiled in metadimensional space. By a conscious or un-
conscious act of will, they could release these energies 
in various forms. Even so, the passage of unmediated 
metadimensional force through unprotected neural tis-
sue almost invariably caused brain damage. Repeated 
use of these abilities caused crippling disability, death, 
or madness. Most psychics were dead within a few 
years after manifesting. A few were able to control their 
powers sufficiently to prevent accidental discharges, 
but safe, controlled use of these abilities was unknown.
In response, the Terran Mandate initiated the 
Psionic Authority, basing it on a terraformed Mars. 
Children from throughout Mandate space were care -
fully selected by the Authority and brought to the in-
stitute in order to study and hopefully cure this tragic 
condition. Persistent legends speak of horrible exper-
iments and ruthless sacrifices of “test subjects”, but no 
proof of such evil ever emerged, and after decades of 
study, the Psionic Authority was actually able to pro-
duce protocols that allowed controlled, safe employ -
ment of psionic powers.
The bloom of psitech development that followed 
and the wonders of jump gates and the Second Wave 
of human expansion are a matter of history. So too is 
the Scream that erupted six centuries ago and granted 
every living psychic in human space either violent mad-
ness or instant death. The interstellar societal collapse 
that followed and the centuries-long Silence between 
the stars has been a matter of living memory for many 
ill-connected frontier worlds.
With the Scream and the death or madness of ev-
ery potential psychic tutor, psionics became the hor -
ror it once was generations ago. Untrained psychics 
suffer under the lash of their own abilities, doomed to 
early death if they aren’t fortunate enough to fumble 
into a means of damping their own powers. Men and 
women of some worlds now fear psychics, not only for 
the ancestral memory of the Scream and the chaos that 
followed, but also because their only experience with 
these unfortunates has been one of uncontrolled power, 
madness, and death.
In the past few centuries, however, a few worlds 
have managed to resuscitate the ancient psychic proto-
cols and develop metapsionic tutors skilled enough to 
train new psychics. For some, it was the fruit of some 
discovered pretech wonder that damped psychic ener-
gies enough to safely experiment. For others, it was the 
product of coldly ruthless experimentation on dispos -
able psychic test victims. A few worlds even retained 
some shreds of psychic mastery from the ancient days, 
the result of a Scream victim who was lucid enough 
to teach pupils, though usually for some demented or 
horrible end. Whatever the source, these institutions 
provide desperately-desired training for those few af-
flicted with MES.
These “psychic academies” are scattered widely 
throughout the sectors of space, usually based out of 
some amenable planetary polity or defensible deep-
space habitat. Some academies are exclusively for the 
use of a particular nation or planet, while others will 
accept anyone who can pay the tuition or satisfy the 
interests of their patrons. Most are powerful players in 
the local political scene, offering services that mean life 
and death to MES sufferers and producing graduates 
who are extremely useful to local rulers. Others need 
to operate in secret, avoiding the fearful attention of 
populations that neither accept nor trust their powers.
Psychic Characters and Training
All Psychic PCs are assumed to have had some sort of 
training. They may have received their education at a 
world-famous psychic academy on their homeworld, or 
been taught in secret by a peripatetic psychic mentor, 
but only one in a million psychics has the blind luck and 
natural aptitude to develop an intuitive control of their 
MES. Of course, it may be that your PC was that one 
in a million, but you’ll want to discuss it with your GM.
Psychic training requires from one to four years 
to complete, depending on the aptitude of the pupil 
and the amount of training support they get from oth-
er psychics. Most academies have one or more “deans” 
who actually have the metapsionic abilities to dampen 
and buffer novice minds. Regular application of their 
abilities to the pupils allows the students to safely prac-
tice and train with their powers until they’ve mastered 
the channeling of the energies. Aside from these deans, 
additional psychic tutors can speed the learning process 
by demonstrations, technical critique, and “encourage-
ment” of various kinds.
On worlds where psionics are outlawed or feared, 
most MES sufferers learn to either conceal their pow-
===== PAGE 34 =====
30• PSioniCS
ers or accept swift euthanasia or exile from a society 
that dreads their abilities. Most are unable to do this; 
their innate abilities boil out at some inopportune time, 
and their true nature is revealed to their grieving family 
and neighbors. Those who do learn to contain their 
abilities can go their whole lives unsuspected. A few 
receive secret teachings from wandering adepts, ones 
who can quickly show them how to suppress their 
powers. The best and most promising might be taken 
as full students by these adepts, shown how to master 
their own abilities and eventually teach others as well.
On planets where psionic powers are less terrify-
ing there is always at least one psychic academy in the 
solar system that invites pupils. Some charge exorbitant 
tuition, but most are supported by governments, pri -
vate organizations, or successful graduates. Students 
are expected to pay for their training one way or an -
other, however; if not in credits, then in service to the 
patron on completion of the training. Many psychics 
with decidedly non-academic Backgrounds acquired 
their experience in the mandatory service period af -
ter their graduation. Most psychic PCs will have left 
such duties behind by the time they start adventuring, 
though a few of them may have departed considerably 
in advance of their expected release date.
Psionic Skills
Psionic powers are divided up into disciplines, each of 
which has a corresponding skill. Someone with a basic, 
functioning expertise in the skill has level-0, while a 
true master of the art would have level-4. Only psychics 
can learn psionic skills, and they are most often taught 
at rigidly-disciplined psychic academies. Attempting to 
develop these skills without such formalized training 
is almost invariably lethal to the experimenter, though 
an exceedingly few natural prodigies sometimes intui -
tively grasp their principles. Even fewer of these gifted 
naturals are able to express their understanding in a 
coherent, teachable form.
Some psychics are “unrestricted”. While they usu-
ally have a distinct aptitude for one or two disciplines, 
they can theoretically learn any of them, and may raise 
any psionic skill they choose. Any character with the 
Psychic class is an unrestricted psychic. Others demon-
strate gifts in only one discipline. While they can even-
tually master all aspects of that power, they can’t raise 
any other psychic skill. Adventurers with the Partial 
Psychic class option are such “restricted” psychics.
Attempting to wield a natural psionic aptitude 
without proper precautions will almost inevitably 
cause death or madness, as the uncontrolled cascade of 
MES energies will cause varying forms of permanent 
brain damage. Untrained psychics can sometimes get 
away with using their powers very rarely, but these nat-
ural prodigies rarely have any ability beyond level-1 in a 
discipline. Those who use their powers often enough to 
gain more practical field experience can expect to end 
up dead, crippled, or insane.
Psionic Powers and Techniques
Every psychic who obtains level-0 proficiency in a dis-
cipline gains access to its core technique. This technique 
varies depending on the discipline, whether it’s physical 
translocation with Teleportation or tissue repair with 
Biopsionics. The strength of the ability varies with the 
practitioner’s skill level; the Psychic Succor provided by 
a biopsionicist with level-0 proficiency is much weaker 
than that provided by someone with level-4 expertise. 
Core techniques improve naturally as the psychic im-
proves their skill level. They do not need to be pur -
chased with skill points or otherwise specially trained.
As a psychic improves their skill level in a disci -
pline, they may also learn other techniques, special 
tricks and abilities they’ve refined through practice. 
Each time they improve a skill level, they can pick a 
new technique from that discipline. Most techniques 
have a minimum skill level associated with them, and 
the PC can’t pick a technique which requires a high -
er skill level than they’ve mastered. They also cannot 
“save” technique picks for later, either. They must be 
chosen immediately after improving the skill.
The techniques listed under the disciplines here 
are commonly-known arts that are part of the basic 
curriculum of most competent psychic academies. No 
special training is required to choose them when a PC 
is able to pick a new technique, as the principles were 
taught as part of their basic education. Other tech -
niques exist that are more esoteric in nature, and may 
require a trainer to educate the PC in their principles 
before they can be learned.
Even so, some of the standard techniques might 
be selectively restricted by an academy, taught only to 
certain pupils. In some cases, this may be due to a spon-
sor’s restrictions on what kind of abilities they want the 
local psychics to possess, while other academies might 
consider them fundamentally immoral abilities. Con -
trol over the metapsionic technique of psychic tutoring 
is particularly strict, as any pupil who has its rudiments 
included in their curriculum may eventually be able 
to train other psychics in turn. A PC may have to go 
to significant lengths in order to patch the holes in a 
government-controlled psychic curriculum.
PCs who want to learn additional techniques be-
yond those acquired by improving their skills may buy 
them separately with skill points, paying one point per 
level of the technique. PCs who want to retrain tech -
niques may do so at the GM’s discretion, usually only 
when they encounter some new esoteric technique 
they’d like to learn in place of an existing art. Tech -
niques can only be retrained into others of equal or 
lower required skill level.
It may be possible for a psychic to create entirely 
new techniques to reflect their personal aptitudes and 
special inclinations. Any such novelty is strictly at the 
GM’s discretion, and unlikely to be done more than 
once or twice over the lifetime of even the most skilled 
psychic experimenter. 
===== PAGE 35 =====
PSioniCS •3 1 
Effort and Psychic Abilities
Psionic powers are fueled by Effort, a measure of the 
psychic’s mental focus, energy, and neural responsive-
ness. A psychic’s maximum Effort total is equal to one 
plus the higher of their Wisdom or Constitution at -
tribute modifiers, plus their highest psychic skill score. 
Thus, a psychic with a Wisdom modifier of -1, a Con-
stitution modifier of +2, and psionic skills of Metap -
sionics-0 and Biopsionics-0 would have a maximum 
Effort score of 3. If he were to then improve his Biop-
sionics skill to level-1, his Effort would become 4.
Effort is “Committed” to fuel a psionic power. 
Some Commitment is relatively short-term, lasting 
only as long as the power is in effect. Other powers 
require that the Effort be Committed for the full scene, 
while the most powerful might require it be Commit -
ted for the rest of the day. Once the Commitment pe-
riod is over, the Effort returns to the psychic. All Effort 
is refreshed after a good night’s rest.
Whenever a power requires you to Commit Effort, 
you commit only one point, though additional effects 
or triggerings may require separate Commitments.
Torching
Psychics can push past their limits by “torching”, inten-
tionally ignoring safety protocols and neural refractory 
periods to channel MES energy beyond their normal 
capacity. For untrained MES subjects, all their power 
use qualifies as torching, as they lack the training nec-
essary to develop safe reserves of Effort.
Torching is an Instant action that can be per -
formed once per round. It provides a free point of Ef-
fort that lasts for the rest of the scene, even if this point 
puts a psychic over the maximum allowed. Every time 
the psychic torches, however, they have to roll on the 
torching result table below.
d6 Torching Result
1-2 Lose 1 point from your Wisdom score
3-4 Lose 1 point from your Constitution score
5 Lose 1 point from an attribute you choose
6 No harm is done by the torching
Psychics reduced below a Wisdom score of 3 go 
violently insane and become “feral psychics”; those re-
duced below scores of 3 in other attributes likewise 
become dead or nonviable as player characters. There is 
no available cure for brain damage caused by torching, 
and even advanced pretech technology has no gener -
ally-known remedy.
Feral psychics are exceptionally dangerous, as their 
form of brain damage invariably results in violent, psy-
chotic behavior and terrifying hallucinations. Worse 
still, they can torch with impunity thereafter, as the 
MES energies have already burnt a clear path through 
what remains of their sanity. Feral psychics have ef -
fectively unlimited Effort with what powers they have 
obtained. There is no known cure for a feral psychic.
Attitudes Toward Psychics
Most worlds have a warily accepting attitude toward 
psionic abilities. Provided they’ve received appropriate 
training, a psychic can live and work in relative peace. 
They are not normally required to wear any sort of 
external badge or marking, and they are entitled to 
keep their own abilities private from anyone but the 
government if they so wish. They may be subject to 
mandatory “national service”, depending on the pol -
ity, and their special abilities might be impressed by 
the government in cases of extreme need, but they are 
able to live a relatively normal, if very well-remuner -
ated life. Ordinary men and women have only a vague 
understanding of psychic powers, but they understand 
enough to know the basic types of disciplines and the 
sort of effects each can produce.
Other worlds have a warmer attitude towards psy-
chics. Those gifted with MES are elevated above the 
ordinary rabble, their abilities celebrated and directed 
toward the advantage of their communities. Such so -
cieties often have psychic ability as a prerequisite for 
substantial authority, and have worked precognitive 
visions or telepathic scans into the ordinary fabric of 
life. Offworld psychics tend to be treated with consider-
able respect on these worlds, though sometimes they’re 
also expected to provide services or guidance they may 
not be equipped to give. Citizens of these worlds usu -
ally have an excellent understanding of how psychic 
disciplines work, in addition to understanding ways 
to counter them.
A few worlds have outright hostility towards psy-
chics and their abilities. MES sufferers might be viewed 
as pitiable victims of a lethal affliction they can’t con-
trol, but trained and capable psychics are threats to be 
wiped out. Their telepathic probings, cheating fore -
sight, and impossibly elusive teleportation makes them 
a menace to normal human beings, and society cannot 
tolerate their existence. Some worlds forbid psionics 
out of fear of another Scream, while others do so out 
of misunderstandings, a desire for social stability, or lo-
cal conditions that make psionic powers exceptionally 
dangerous. A few of these worlds have private psychic 
academies to train psionic myrmidons for the ruling 
class or deniable agents of private intrigue.
On almost all worlds, however, psychics can ex -
pect to suffer considerably harsher legal penalties than 
conventional criminals. Some worlds simply have no 
resources to jail an unwilling teleporter or mind-read-
ing telepath, while others expect those of great gifts to 
have correspondingly great virtue. It’s not unknown 
for psychics to face summary execution for crimes that 
would earn other malefactors a simple jail sentence.
A few worlds have ancient pretech artifacts or 
technologies that are capable of defeating or suppress -
ing psychic powers. Such resources are always extreme-
ly rare, and normally only deployed to protect heads of 
state and similar top-level figures, along with govern -
ment sites of planetary importance.
===== PAGE 36 =====
32• bioPSioniCS
bIoPsIonICs
Biopsionic powers repair, augment, debilitate, or dam-
age living creatures. Unless otherwise specified the 
biopsionicist must be able to touch a target, though 
clothing and armor do not interfere with the use of 
these abilities. Touching a willing or unsuspecting tar-
get is automatic, whereas touching a resisting target 
requires a normal Punch hit roll with a bonus equal to 
the practitioner’s Biopsionics skill. Such touch effects 
do not inflict the normal damage of a Punch attack.
Unsurprisingly, biopsionic powers are among the 
most accepted psychic abilities. Even a modestly-expe-
rienced biopsion can perform miracles of healing for a 
community lucky enough to have their services.
System Strain
Many curative biopsionic powers add to the target’s 
System Strain. System Strain is a measure of the amount 
of system stress, intrusive modification, and general bi-
ological distress an organism might be suffering. Psion-
ic healing, cybernetic implants, and powerful drugs all 
add to a target’s System Strain.
If using a power or drug on a target would make 
their System Strain exceed their Constitution score, the 
effect fails to function; their body simply cannot adapt 
to the changes and cannot benefit from them.
System Strain decreases automatically by one point 
after each night of rest, provided the organism is well-
fed and not compromised by sickness or privation.
Core Technique- Psychic Succor
The adept’s touch stabilizes critically-wounded organ-
isms. More sophisticated practitioners can heal tissue 
injuries, though curing diseases, detoxifying poisons, 
and fixing congenital deformities require additional 
techniques. Each use of Psychic Succor adds one point 
of System Strain to the target, or two points if they 
were mortally wounded at the time.
Activating Psychic Succor requires the biopsion to 
Commit Effort for the day. Once used, they can con -
tinue to use it for the rest of that scene without Com-
mitting Effort again.
Level-0: The psychic’s touch can automatically stabilize 
a mortally-wounded target as a Main Action. This 
power must be used on a target within six rounds 
of their collapse, and does not function on tar -
gets that have been decapitated or killed by Heavy 
weapons. It’s the GM’s decision as to whether a 
target is intact enough for this power to work.
Level-1: As level-0, and heal 1d6+1 hit points of damage. 
If used on a mortally-wounded target, they revive 
with the rolled hit points and can act normally on 
the next round.
Level-2: As level-1, but healing 2d6+2 hit points instead.
Level-3: As level-2, but healing 2d6+6 hit points instead.
Level-4: As level-3, but healing 3d6+8 hit points instead.
Mastered Succor Level-1
The biopsion has developed a sophisticated mastery of 
their core ability, and they no longer need to Commit 
Effort to activate it, and may use it whenever they wish. 
The use of additional techniques that augment Psychic 
Succor might still require Effort to be Committed.
Organic Purification Protocols Level-1
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor now cures any poisons or 
diseases the subject may be suffering, albeit it requires 
Committing Effort for the day as an additional sur -
charge. Biowarfare organisms, exceptionally virulent 
diseases, or TL5 toxins may resist this curing, requiring 
a Wis/Biopsionics skill check at a difficulty of at least 
10. Failure means that the adept cannot cure the target’s 
disease. This technique cannot cure congenital illnesses.
Remote Repair Level-1
Psychic Succor and other biopsionic techniques that nor-
mally require touch contact can now be applied at a 
distance up to 100 meters, provided the biopsion can 
see the target with their unaided vision. Hostile powers 
that normally require a hit roll will hit automatically. 
Each time this technique is used, Effort must be Com-
mitted for the scene.
Invincible Stand Level-2
The biopsion has mastered techniques of emergency 
tissue reinforcement and system stabilization. As an 
Instant action, they can Commit Effort for the scene to 
keep themself or a target they can touch active even at 
zero hit points. This technique must be used once every 
round on the target or they collapse at the end of the 
round. If the target suffers hit point damage, the biop-
sion must Instantly Commit Effort for the scene or the 
target goes down immediately with a mortal wound. A 
Heavy weapon hit on a subject of this power or similar 
physical dismemberment will always kill a target, re -
gardless of this technique.
Major Organ Restoration Level-2
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor can now cure congeni -
tal birth defects and regrow missing limbs and organs. 
It can even be used to stabilize targets that have been 
dropped by Heavy weapons, decapitated, or otherwise 
dramatically dismembered, provided it’s used within 
one round per level of Biopsionic skill. The best that 
can be done for such badly-mangled targets is stabiliza-
tion, after which they must rest for 24 hours before any 
further hit points can be healed by Biopsionics, stims, 
or natural rest.
===== PAGE 37 =====
Biopsionics and Hospitals
Biopsionics is a spectacularly effective discipline 
for curing physical injuries and sicknesses, but 
its use for the latter is capped by the biopsion’s 
available Effort. Hospitals on worlds with access to 
psychic academies often have several biopsions on 
staff, proficient with the requisite techniques and 
capable of quickly healing tremendous amounts of 
trauma injuries on short notice.
Assuming one proficient and available biop -
sion for every 100,000 citizens, however, the total 
amount of sickness-curing ability is going to be 
very limited, and likely reserved for the powerful 
and wealthy. The vanishingly few psychics who 
are master metapsions capable of the Flawless 
Mastery of Organic Purification Protocols can easily 
command as much as two thousand credits a day 
just for temporary work at a grateful hospital.
Ordinary PC biopsions who want to pick up 
some extra work curing sicknesses can usually find 
temp employment with a local medical facility for 
50 credits per day per Effort point they have. Note 
that some patients may be very upset if the hospital 
fails to assign them the PC’s limited Effort.
bioPSioniCS •33 
Tissue Integrity Field Level-2
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor may now also affect all 
allies within ten meters of the target. Allies can decline 
the healing if they don’t require it or don’t want to take 
the additional System Strain. Each use of this technique 
requires that the biopsion Commit Effort for the day in 
addition to the cost of the Psychic Succor.
Accelerated Succor Level-3
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor now can be used as an On 
Turn power, albeit only once per round. By Commit -
ting an additional Effort for the day with each use, it 
can even be used as an Instant power, though it still 
can only be used once per round. Any surcharges for 
augmenting the succor apply normally, such as with 
Tissue Integrity Field.
Metamorph Level-3
The biopsion can now shape their own or another will-
ing target’s physical form as a Main Action, transform-
ing a touched target into any humanoid form within 
50% of their own mass. Claws and other body arma -
ments can be fashioned equivalent to Light or Medium 
melee weapons and innate armor equivalent to AC 13. 
Gills and other environmental-survival alterations are 
also viable at the GM’s discretion, but flight is a bridge 
too far for this power.
A person can be impersonated down to the DNA 
level, provided a blood or hair sample is available. The 
use of this adds one System Strain point to the target 
that does not recover so long as the change is in effect. 
Applying Metamorph requires that the biopsion Commit 
Effort for as long as the change is to be maintained. If 
applied to a target other than the psychic, the power 
automatically ends if the psychic gets more than one 
hundred kilometers away.
Teratic Overload Level-3
This use of biopsionics inflicts potentially-lethal dam -
age on a touched target as a Main Action, and requires 
that the biopsion Commit Effort for the scene. The 
target suffers 1d6 damage per level of the psychic’s Bi-
opsionics skill and must make a Physical saving throw. 
On a failure, the damage is tripled and the target is now 
affected by an obvious, lethal cancer that will kill them 
in 1d6 months. The cancer can be treated by a TL4 
hospital or ship’s sick bay if managed within a month’s 
time. If the biopsion Commits Effort for the day instead 
of the scene, they can control the power sufficiently to 
do no hit point damage and create very subtle tumors, 
leaving the cancer undetectable without a TL4 medical 
examination. Such victims probably won’t even know 
they’ve been attacked by this power. Whether a success 
or failure, this power cannot be used on the same target 
more than once per scene.
Holistic Optimization Patterning Level-4
The biopsion gains the ability to drastically augment 
their own or a touched ally’s physical abilities as an 
On Turn action. This boost lasts for the rest of the 
scene, adds two points of System Strain to the target 
and gives them a +2 bonus to all Strength or Dexterity 
skill checks, hit rolls, and damage rolls along with 20 
extra hit points. Any damage is taken off these tem -
porary hit points first, and both the bonuses and any 
hit points in excess of the target’s maximum are lost at 
the end of the scene. Each invocation of this technique 
requires the biopsion to Commit Effort for the day, and 
this power cannot be used on a given target more than 
once per scene.
Quintessential Reconstruction Level-4
The biopsion becomes extremely difficult to kill, en -
coding their mind in a coherent pattern of MES energy 
coterminous with their realspace coordinates. If killed, 
the psychic will regenerate from the largest remain -
ing fragment of their body over 24 hours. This pro -
cess maximizes their System Strain for one week. If 
brought to zero hit points during this week, they die 
instantly and permanently. The psychic retains a vague 
awareness of their surroundings while “dead” and can 
postpone their regeneration for up to a week in order 
to avoid notice, but burial or entombment may result in 
a very short second life. Each use of this power inflicts 
one point of permanent attribute loss in an attribute 
of the biopsion’s choice.
===== PAGE 38 =====
34• metaPSioniCS
meTaPsIonICs
Metapsionics is the rarest and most esoteric of the psy-
chic disciplines, with few psychics having the necessary 
temperament or interest in developing these complex 
abilities. A metapsion controls psychic energy itself, 
molding and shaping the flows of energy that spill 
through the brains of those marked by MES.
Taken in isolation, metapsionics allows a psychic 
to increase the raw Effort available to them and become 
more flexible in how this Effort is used. Expert metap-
sions can even teach other potential psychics how to 
control and channel their new abilities, and the services 
of a trained psychic mentor command considerable 
sums in most systems.
Beyond this, in most stellar sectors a competent 
metapsion is the only practical way to protect a target 
from undetectable psychic assault. Without a vigilant 
brainguard, a head of state, interstellar celebrity, or 
planetary oligarch might find their minds rifled effort-
lessly by some undetected psychic intruder. 
As a consequence, many metapsions become much 
more physically competent and better-trained in com-
bat than the average psychic. The high prices they can 
command as brainguards attract some, though others 
find their clients too aggravating to endure for long.
Core Technique- Psychic Refinement
The metapsion gains improved mastery over their own 
powers and an innate sensitivity to the use of psionic 
abilities in their presence.
Level-0: The adept can visually and audibly detect the 
use of psychic powers. If both the source and tar-
get are visible to the metapsion, they can tell who’s 
using the power, even if it’s normally impercep -
tible. They gain a +2 bonus on any saving throw 
versus a psionic power.
Level-1: The metapsion’s maximum Effort increases by 
an additional point.
Level-2: The adept can determine whether or not a 
person is a psychic or has latent psionic abilities 
through one round of visual inspection. Their sav-
ing throw bonus against psionic powers increases 
to +3.
Level-3: The metapsion’s maximum Effort increases by 
an additional point.
Level-4: The metapsion can perform a slightly safer 
version of torching. Instead of rolling the torch -
ing damage die, they simply suffer 10 hit points of 
damage after torching is used. The damage occurs 
after the fueled power activates, allowing a psychic 
at low hit points to trigger a power before falling 
unconscious. This damage cannot be healed by 
anything but natural bed rest, though a psychic 
can be stabilized if this technique drops her to zero 
hit points.
Cloak Powers Level-1
The metapsion can conceal their own psychic abilities 
from metapsionic senses. They must Commit Effort 
for as long as they wish to cloak their powers. While 
hidden, only a metapsion with equal or higher skill in 
Metapsionics can detect their abilities with their level-0 
or level-2 Psychic Refinement abilities. In such cases, an 
opposed Wis/Metapsionics roll is made between the 
metapsion and the investigator. If the investigator wins, 
the cloak is pierced, while if the metapsion wins, the 
investigator’s Psychic Refinement remains oblivious.
Mindtracing Level-1
The metapsion can trace back the use of psionic powers 
they’ve noticed in their presence. By Committing Ef -
fort for the scene as an Instant action, they can see and 
hear through the senses of a user of a psychic power, 
gaining an intuitive awareness of their location and 
treating them as a visible target for purposes of their 
own abilities. Thus, if they see someone being affected 
by a telepathy power with no visible source, they can 
use this ability to briefly share the hidden telepath’s 
senses. If used on a target that is teleporting, they can 
perceive the teleporter’s view of their destination. Use 
on a metamorphically-shaped impostor would reveal 
the biopsion responsible for the change, and so forth. 
These shared senses last for only one round and do not 
interfere with the adept’s other actions.
Synthetic Adaptation Level-1
This is a particularly esoteric technique, one that re -
quires the adept to have at least Program-0 or Fix-0 
skill in order to master. With it, however, the metap-
sion has learned how to synergize with the quantum 
intelligence of a VI or True AI in order to apply Telepa-
thy or Biopsion powers to their inanimate corpus. Only 
intelligent machines can be affected, as the technique 
requires a sentient mind to catalyze the effect.
This synergy takes much of its force from the ad-
ept. Any System Strain the powers might inflict must 
be paid by the adept rather than the target.
Neural Trap Level-2
The metapsion allows a hostile psychic into their men-
tal sanctum in order to gain a later advantage. When 
targeted by a hostile psionic power that allows a save, 
the metapsion may Commit Effort as an Instant action 
and voluntarily fail the saving throw, accepting the ef-
fect. The next psychic power the user targets at that 
assailant then allows the victim no saving throw. This 
technique lasts until the metapsion makes their psychic 
attack or reclaims their Committed Effort. A hostile 
psychic may be affected by only one Neural Trap from 
a given psychic at a time.
===== PAGE 39 =====
metaPSioniCS •35 
Psychic Static Level-2
As an Instant action, the metapsion may Commit Ef -
fort for the day to negate a perceived psychic power. 
The psychic responsible for the effect must Commit 
Effort for the day as an Instant action to resist this ne-
gation, otherwise the power ends and any action used 
to trigger it is wasted. The PC may then Commit Ef -
fort for the day again, with each spending and count -
er-spending until one runs out of Effort or chooses to 
stop. Psychic Static can be applied only once per round 
to any particular power. The target of the Psychic Stat-
ic automatically knows the position of the interfering 
metapsion, though other onlookers do not have any 
obvious way of identifying the metapsion.
Suspended Manifestation Level-2
The metapsion is capable of “hanging” a psychic power 
in their brain, forming the energy patterns and then 
suspending them in a self-sustaining loop until it’s time 
to trigger their release. The psychic must Commit Ef-
fort for the day to hang a power, along with the Effort 
normally necessary to trigger it. None of this Effort can 
be recovered until the power is expended, after which 
it recovers at its usual speed. Activating the power is 
an Instant action, or an On Turn action if it allows the 
target a saving throw of some kind. Only one ability 
can be held suspended at any one time.
Concert of Minds Level-3
As an On Turn action, the metapsion may Commit 
Effort and form a psychic gestalt with one or more 
willing psychics within three meters, including up to 
one other psychic per Metapsion skill level. This ge -
stalt persists as long as the Effort remains committed, 
regardless of the subsequent distance between psychics. 
On their own turn, any member of the gestalt may use 
any power or technique known by any other member, 
using the other member’s skill levels as necessary and 
paying any Effort cost from their own pool. This gestalt 
shares only psychic power, not thoughts or senses. At 
the end of each round in which one or more members 
have used some other member’s powers or abilities on 
their turn of action, the metapsion must Commit Effort 
for the scene or the gestalt drops and cannot be re-es-
tablished for the rest of the scene.
Metadimensional Friction Level-3
As a Main Action, the metapsion Commits Effort for 
the scene to create localized MES turbulence around a 
visible target psychic within 200 meters. Each time the 
target Commits Effort or an NPC initiates a psychic 
power, they suffer 1d8 damage per Metapsionics skill 
level of the adept. Each time the target suffers the dam-
age they can attempt a Mental saving throw to throw 
off the effect. It lasts no longer than the rest of the scene 
at most. Only one application of this friction can affect 
a target at once.
Psychic Tutelage Level-3
An expert metapsion can modulate and temper the 
metadimensional energy that surges through an un -
trained psychic’s mind. This “safety buffer” allows the 
novice to experiment with their abilities and gradually 
develop the control they need to channel their powers 
without causing permanent brain damage. Without 
this technique, it is virtually impossible to turn a nor-
mal with untapped potential into a trained psychic.
An adept with Metapsionics-3 skill can train up to 
ten pupils at once. One with Metapsionics-4 can train 
up to one hundred. It requires only a week to train a 
potential in ways to avoid accidentally triggering their 
powers and suffering the damage that follows, but actu-
ally teaching them to use their powers effectively takes 
anywhere from one to four years depending on their 
natural aptitude and the availability of other psychics 
willing to assist the metapsion in the training process.
Surge Momentum Level-3
The metapsion’s abilities can be reinforced with a de-
gree of metadimensional energy that would cause sub-
stantial damage to a less adept mind. Particularly weak 
or unprepared minds might be completely crushed by 
the force of the adept’s augmented will.
The adept must Commit Effort for the day when 
using a power that normally grants its target a saving 
throw. The target then suffers a penalty equal to the 
adept’s Metapsionics skill on any saving throw normal-
ly granted by the power. If the target’s hit die total or 
character level is less than half the adept’s level, round-
ed up, they automatically fail their saving throw.
Flawless Mastery Level-4
When this technique is learned, the adept may choose 
one technique from any discipline they know. That 
technique no longer requires Effort to be Committed in 
any way, though other techniques that augment it may 
still exact a cost. Mastered Psychic Static, for example, 
can expend an effectively unlimited amount of effort. 
If the technique has a duration based on Committed 
Effort then it lasts until the metapsion chooses to end it 
or is killed. This technique may only be mastered once, 
though the perfected technique may be changed with 
a month of meditation and practice.
Impervious Pavis of Will Level-4
When this technique is learned, the metapsion must 
choose a discipline. They then become entirely im -
mune to unwanted powers from that discipline; they 
and their abilities are simply not valid targets for pur-
poses of that discipline’s powers unless the adept choos-
es to be affected. By Committing Effort for the day as 
an Instant action, they can extend this immunity for a 
scene to all allies within 50 meters. This technique may 
be learned more than once, and any shared protection 
applies to all disciplines negated by the adept.
===== PAGE 40 =====
36• PreCognition
PreCognITIon
The discipline of Precognition relates to sensing the 
cascade of future events and reading the achronal cha -
os of the metadimensional energy that ripples in the 
psychic’s brain. Readings provided by Precognition 
tend to be focused on the psychic and what they find 
interesting or important. Matters irrelevant to the seer 
are unlikely to be noticed, even if they are of critical 
importance to those involved. More advanced tech -
niques of Precognition can even influence the future, 
adjusting probabilities by changing or pruning certain 
metadimensional currents.
The future is not carved in stone. Oracles can be 
falsified by present action or sheer random chance. 
When a reading is ambiguous or the future seems un-
certain, the GM should simply give the most probable 
reading for the power as their own judgment recom -
mends.
Precognition is strictly future-oriented. For as -
sorted complex reasons, the past is vastly more difficult 
to observe with psionic powers, and postcognition is 
generally considered impossible.
Precogs are generally viewed with considerable 
unease by the general population. They’re not as widely 
feared as telepaths, but the uncanny powers of foresight 
they possess can make them difficult company. They 
can earn very substantial sums of money from those 
desperate to learn of some future outcome, but the 
specificity of their visions makes it difficult for them 
to perceive large-scale future events.
A precog can see a city in flames or a stock market 
board showing a crash, but even the most powerful 
can’t tell if the conflagration is just a limited local disas-
ter or a planet-consuming catastrophe, nor can they tell 
if the crash is a temporary pullback in the market or a 
harbinger of global depression. Many precogs have dif-
ficulty dealing with this ambiguity, and some become 
fixed on personal interpretations of their visions that 
may or may not play out as they have seen.
Bending the Future
Everything a precog sees is provisional. Some outcomes 
may be so likely as to be nigh-certain, but nothing is 
truly, absolutely destined. Vigorous activity or simple 
unexpected chance can skew future outcomes.
This effect is one reason why choirs of precogs 
have not been more widely exploited by planetary 
governments. The clearer and more detailed a future 
outcome becomes, the simpler it is to find the crucial 
events that can be changed to derail it. The more in -
tense the precognitive focus toward a future event, 
the more fluid it becomes as fresh readings take into 
account the countermoves that others have made. Ru-
mors persist of ancient pretech augmentation hardware 
that can “fix” future outcomes, but most governments 
lack the resources to even consider such extravagance.
Core Technique- Oracle
The precog gains a progressively-greater intuitive un-
derstanding of their own future. Each invocation of 
the Oracle technique requires a Main Action and that 
the user Commit Effort for the day. Once triggered, 
the adept gets a single brief vision related to the ques -
tion about the future that they’re asking. This vision 
is always from their own personal vantage point and 
never reveals more than a minute of insight, though 
the psychic processes it almost instantly as part of the 
power’s use.
The GM should answer the question as if the 
PC were about to perform the act or engage in the 
investigation pertinent to the question. Thus, if the 
adept wanted to know what pressing a button would 
do and the GM knows that it’s connected to a bomb, 
the psychic might get a vision of sudden death. If the 
bomb were on a time delay that extended past the time 
horizon of the oracle, however, the psychic might just 
see a vision of herself waiting patiently, with nothing 
happening.
Visions should relate to actions and events, not 
abstract facts. Oracle couldn’t tell a psychic who the 
crime boss of a slum neighborhood is, for example, but 
it could give a vision of the psychic caught in the next 
bloody riot and the gang boss who’s directing the myri-
ad thugs. It couldn’t reveal the name of a security guard, 
but it could show the seer the impending moment that 
the next guard patrol will enter the area the psychic 
plans to infiltrate. Only the most important or signifi -
cant information is conveyed by the technique, even if 
multiple events of interest might transpire during the 
time horizon.
Oracle can only be used on a given question or topic 
once until the situation changes substantially or a week 
goes by. The maximum time horizon of the Oracle in-
creases as the adept’s Precognition skill improves.
Level-0: One minute into the future.
Level-1: One day into the future.
Level-2: One week into the future.
Level-3: Three months into the future.
Level-4: One year into the future.
Intuitive Response Level-1
As an Instant action, the precog can Commit Effort for 
the scene just before they roll initiative. Their initia-
tive score is treated as one better than anyone else’s 
involved in the scene. If another participant has this 
power or some other ability that grants automatic ini-
tiative success, roll initiative normally to determine 
which of them goes first, and then the rest of the com-
batants act. This ability cannot be used if the precog 
has been surprised.
===== PAGE 41 =====
PreCognition •37 
Sense the Need Level-1
At some point in the recent past, the psychic had a 
vague but intense premonition that a particular object 
would be needed. By triggering this power as an Instant 
action and Committing Effort for the day, the psychic 
can retroactively declare that they brought along any 
one object that they could have reasonably acquired 
and carried to this point. This object must be plausible 
given recent events; if the psychic has just been strip-
searched, very few objects could reasonably have been 
kept, while a psychic who’s just passed through a weap-
ons check couldn’t still have a loaded laser pistol.
Terminal Reflection Level-1
The psychic’s Oracle power automatically triggers as an 
Instant action moments before some unexpected dan -
ger or ambush, giving the precog a brief vision of the 
impending hazard. This warning comes just in time to 
avoid springing a trap or to negate combat surprise for 
the precog and their companions. If the psychic does 
not immediately Commit Effort for the day, this sense 
goes numb and this technique cannot be used for the 
rest of the day.
Alternate Outcome Level-2
The precog can sense impending failure and attempt 
to salvage the action. As an Instant action, the precog 
can target a visible ally or their own self and Commit 
Effort for the day to allow the target to reroll a failed 
hit roll, saving throw, or skill check, taking the better 
of the two rolls. This power disrupts delicate lines of 
probability, however, and cannot be used on any given 
target more than once a day.
Destiny’s Shield Level-2
The precog observes an incoming injury and tries to 
find an alternate future in which the attack misses. As 
an Instant action, the precog can Commit Effort for 
the day to force an attacker to reroll a successful hit 
roll. This technique only works on attacks against the 
psychic’s person, not against attacks aimed at a vehicle 
they’re occupying or harm that doesn’t involve an at-
tack roll. If the rerolled attack still hits, however, the 
damage done is maximized. This technique can be used 
only once per incoming attack.
Anguished Vision Level-3
The adept’s precognition is sophisticated enough to 
clearly foresee several seconds into the future. As an 
Instant action, the psychic may Commit Effort for the 
day and declare that what they have just done or seen 
is a vision of the immediate future. Time rolls back 
to the start of the initiative count in a combat turn, 
or six seconds earlier if out of combat. Nothing that 
happened during that round has really come to pass yet.
This ability is tremendously draining, and can be 
used only once per day.
Cursed Luck Level-3
Negative probabilities are woven tightly around a vis-
ible animate target, including robots and animals but 
not including vehicles. Triggering this technique re -
quires a Main Action and Committing Effort for the 
scene. The target must roll any attack rolls, damage 
rolls, skill checks, and saving throws twice and take the 
worst result each time. Any attempts to hit the target 
or damage dice rolled against it may be rolled twice and 
the better result taken. Intelligent targets can make a 
Mental saving throw at the end of each round to throw 
off the effect; this save is not penalized by the power.
Forced Outcome Level-3
Through careful manipulation of probability, the adept 
can influence random physical events in their vicinity. 
Triggering this technique requires a Main Action and 
Committing Effort for the scene. Any simple, random 
mechanical outcome can be completely controlled for 
the scene, such as a roulette wheel or the order of a 
deck of shuffled cards. Any other physical event in the 
area that seems not-entirely-implausible may be made 
to occur by this technique, provided it doesn’t involve 
more than a few objects and doesn’t require human 
involvement. The GM decides what random events are 
and are not adequately possible. Anything more than 
one unusual coincidence or chance per scene is likely 
impossible to produce.
Not My Time Level-4
The precog instinctively wrenches the lines of proba -
bility away from futures in which they are about to die. 
This technique triggers automatically when the pre -
cog is about to die, provided they can Commit Effort 
for the day. On triggering, random events somehow 
conspire to leave the precog alive, even if outrageous 
coincidences and ridiculous luck are required. Provided 
the precog doesn’t intentionally thrust herself back into 
danger, their life is secured for the next few minutes at 
least, though there’s no guarantee the psychic will sur-
vive intact in mind or body. This technique can trigger 
no more often than once per week.
Prophecy Level-4
The power of the precog extends to dictating future 
events that directly involve them. As a Main Action, 
the precognitive PC may make one prediction involv -
ing their personal future or future condition within 
the next year. Provided they take reasonable measures 
to enable this prediction, that no direct resistance is 
mounted by an enemy, and that the prediction doesn’t 
seem highly improbable to the GM, it will come to pass. 
The adept must Commit Effort when this power is used, 
and the Effort remains Committed until the prophecy 
comes to pass or is abandoned. This ability cannot be 
used more than once per month and only one prophecy 
may be active at a time.
===== PAGE 42 =====
38• telekineSiS
TelekInesIs
Telekinetic abilities are something of a mixed bless -
ing to those psychics who have them. While they 
are among the least feared and distrusted of psychic 
powers, they also produce effects that are not nearly 
so widely-demanded as biopsionic healing or metap -
sionic brainguarding. A telekinetic must be canny and 
creative to get the most from their abilities.
Telekinetic powers are strong but somewhat im -
precise. The force they generate is usually invisible, 
though a psychic can allow a visible glow if desired, and 
the source of the telekinetic manipulation is not obvi-
ous to ordinary senses. Objects being held or worn by 
a mobile creature cannot normally be manipulated by 
telekinesis, nor can unwilling intelligent targets be di-
rectly manipulated. Machines, including non-sentient 
robots, can be affected as any other inanimate object, 
however. The psychic cannot use this discipline to lift 
their own person without special techniques.
Some techniques refer to a “physical attack” or 
“physical damage”. This means a straightforward kinetic 
impact: bullets, punches, collisions, falls, compressions, 
or the like. Energy attacks are not included.
Core Technique- Telekinetic Manipulation
The adept may Commit Effort for the scene as a Main 
Action to direct telekinetic force toward an object or 
person within unaided visual range or with tactile 
contact with the psychic. This force isn’t responsive 
enough to be effective as a weapon without further 
refinement of technique, and cannot cause damage to 
living or mobile targets. If used to crush or harm im-
mobile unliving objects, it does 1d6 damage per skill 
level of the psychic per round of focus. Objects move at 
20 meters per round when moved telekinetically.
A telekinetic force can be maintained over multi-
ple rounds without expending further actions, such as 
holding a metal platform in place under a group of al-
lies, but the psychic cannot again activate this technique 
on a second object until they release the first.
Level-0: The psychic can exert force as if with one hand 
and their own strength.
Level-1: The psychic can manipulate objects as if with 
both hands and can lift up to two hundred kilo -
grams with this ability.
Level-2: The psychic can lift or manipulate up to four 
hundred kilograms and smash a human-sized 
hole in structures of light wooden construction 
or lighter as a Main Action.
Level-3: The psychic can manipulate up to eight hun -
dred kilograms and can affect as many individual 
objects at once as they have Telekinesis skill levels.
Level-4: The psychic can manipulate up to a metric ton 
and can smash human-sized holes in TL4-con -
structed exterior walls, light stone walls, or similar 
barriers as a Main Action.
Kinetic Transversal Level-1
The adept may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to 
move freely over vertical or overhanging surfaces as if 
they were flat ground, crossing any solid surface strong 
enough to bear five kilos of weight. They can also move 
over liquids at their full movement rate. This move -
ment ability lasts as long as the Effort is committed. 
Pressure Field Level-1
As an Instant action, the adept can manifest a protective 
force skin around their person equivalent to a vacc suit, 
maintaining pressure and temperature even in hard 
vacuum conditions. They can ignore temperatures at 
a range of plus or minus 100 degrees Celsius and auto-
matically pressurize thin atmospheres for breathability, 
or filter particulates or airborne toxins. By Committing 
Effort for the scene, they can shield up to six comrades. 
This lasts until the user reclaims the Effort.
Telekinetic Armory Level-1
The adept may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to 
create both weapons and armor out of telekinetic force. 
These weapons are treated as tech level 4 and act as a 
rifle or any advanced melee weapon. Attack rolls can 
use either Dexterity, Wisdom, or Constitution modifi-
ers, and may use the Telekinesis skill as the combat skill.
Armor may be created as part of this power, grant-
ing the psychic a base Armor Class equal to 15 plus their 
Telekinesis skill level. This armor does not stack with 
conventional armor, but Dexterity or shields modify 
it as usual. The gear continues to exist as long as the 
psychic chooses to leave the Effort committed, and they 
may be invisible or visible at the psychic’s discretion.
Impact Sump Level-2
The adept may Commit Effort for the day as an Instant 
action to negate a single instance of physical damage. 
This ability is too taxing to be used more than once per 
day, but as an Instant action, it can be triggered even 
after damage is rolled.
Slip Field Level-2
As a Main Action, the psychic Commits Effort for the 
scene and decreases the friction at a point in sight. Up 
to ten meters in diameter is affected, making it difficult 
for enemies to move from their current position. All 
chosen targets must make an Evasion saving throw or 
fall prone, becoming unable to stand up or move more 
than a meter per Move action taken. If used against a 
ground vehicle, the driver must make a Dex/Pilot skill 
check at a difficulty of 8 plus the adept’s Telekinesis 
skill or go out of control, driving directly forward for 
a round and crashing into any obstacles. Targets who 
save are immune to this technique for the scene.
===== PAGE 43 =====
Bot Scrapping
While telekinetic powers can’t normally be used to 
harm an intelligent target without a special tech -
nique, non-sentient robots have no such protec -
tion. A VI or True AI can create enough metad -
imensional static with their cognition to prevent 
harm from telekinesis, but ordinary guard bots, 
servitor droids, or warbots are extremely suscep -
tible to telekinetic destruction.
In most cases, this is as simple a matter as 
telekinetically lifting and then dropping the bot. A 
psychic can destroy as many such bots in a round 
as they can telekinetically manipulate; one for 
most, or three or four at higher skill levels. This 
also assumes the psychic can lift the bot’s weight.
Some military bots may be resilient enough 
to handle this battering, suffering 1d10 damage 
per level of Telekinesis skill the psychic possesses. 
Most have no such chance of survival.
telekineSiS •39 
Telekinetic Expertise Level-2
The adept has become familiar enough with the ma -
nipulation of telekinetic force that they may now use 
Telekinetic Manipulation without Committing Effort. 
Thermokinesis Level-2
Telekinetic power involves kinetic energy, but a suf -
ficiently sophisticated grip on motion can be used to 
agitate the molecules of an inanimate object and cause 
it to melt or burst into flame. Similar focus can chill or 
freeze such substances.
Applying Thermokinesis to a target requires that 
the adept Commit Effort for the scene as a Main Action. 
Thermokinesis cannot affect objects larger than the adept 
could lift with their Telekinetic Manipulation.
As with other telekinetic powers, this ability does 
not work on objects being held or used by intelligent 
creatures. Non-sentient robots or other objects with hit 
points take 1d12 damage per level of Telekinesis skill 
each time this technique is applied to them.
Tangible Force Construct Level-3
Once per turn, as an On Turn action, the psychic can 
Commit Effort for the scene to create a telekinetic force 
construct at a visible point, provided it can fit within 
a three-meter cube. The force construct can be shaped 
in any way the psychic wishes, and can remain fixed in 
its location without external supports if desired. It is 
as sturdy as a TL4 construction and may be visible or 
invisible at the adept’s choice. The construct lasts until 
the end of the scene, until the psychic dispels it, or until 
it is smashed with 20 points of damage against AC 15.
Telekinetic Ram Level-3
As a Main Action, the psychic can Commit Effort for 
the scene to target a tremendous, uncontrolled burst of 
force at a single target within sight. This burst requires 
some time to detonate, however, and will only go off 
at the end of the next round. Targets of this technique 
are aware of an oppressive, electrical tingling in the air 
and are apt to instinctively move; this technique is thus 
generally useless against any target that is not entirely 
immobile, as any movement of a chosen target disrupts 
the ram. Once the ram detonates, however, it is suffi -
cient to destroy any immobile civilian vehicle, create a 
five-meter hole in anything short of hardened military 
fortifications, or inflict 5d12 damage on anything else 
as if it were struck by a Heavy weapon.
Reactive Telekinesis Level-3
As an Instant action, the psychic can Commit Effort for 
the scene whenever an assailant misses them with a 
physical attack. The attack is then reflected back against 
the assailant, who must reroll the attack against their 
own person twice. If either roll hits, the assailant suf -
fers damage from their own attack. If both rolls hit, the 
damage is the maximum possible.
Force Puppetry Level-4
As a Main Action, the telekinetic can Commit Effort for 
the day to suborn a visible target’s mobility, whether 
robotic, vehicular, or human, provided it’s no larger 
than a ground car. A sapient victim can make a Men-
tal saving throw to resist the psychic onslaught; on a 
failure, they lose control of their physical actions. If not 
piloted by the telekinetic, the target remains motionless 
or continues on its current direction of travel. If the 
telekinetic spends a Main Action to control them, they 
can be made to perform any physical action that is not 
directly suicidal, using the psychic’s skill levels and hit 
bonus for any attacks or skill checks they might make. 
The puppetry lasts until the end of the scene, until the 
target leaves the psychic’s sight, or until a sapient target 
believes that their action or inaction is about to get 
them killed. The psychic’s control is fine enough to 
achieve even very delicate physical motions, but it is 
not good enough to control the target’s speech, though 
it can keep them silent.
Telekinetic Flight Level-4
As an Instant action, the telekinetic can Commit Effort 
to begin flying, and may extend this effect to up to a 
half-dozen unresisting, human-sized allies within 30 
meters. While flying, the psychic can move at twice 
their normal movement rate in any direction They can 
plunge earthward at up to terminal velocity without 
harm, and even orbital insertions are survivable with 
this power if a vacc suit is available or the Pressure Field 
technique is used. Allies must end their turns within 30 
meters of the psychic to maintain this flight but control 
their own motion. As an Instant, this power may be 
triggered in time to negate falling damage. The flight 
lasts for as long as the Effort remains Committed.
===== PAGE 44 =====
40• telePathy
TelePaThy
There is no psychic power more threatening and dis -
turbing to normal humanity than that of telepathy. 
The prospect of having one’s innermost thoughts and 
secrets pried out by imperceptible means is deeply trou-
bling to most men and women, and telepaths are often 
given a wide berth by others simply for fear of what 
private thoughts they might sift out.
Some worlds that are otherwise accepting of psy-
chic powers go so far as to ban known telepaths and 
forbid the teaching of the discipline within their terri -
tory. Even those few that do, however, can rarely re-
sist the urge to maintain some “government-approved” 
telepathic training program for candidates selected for 
their political trustworthiness or powerful backers. 
The benefits of having an imperceptible mental spy 
are too great for most states to forgo.
Most worlds do not ban telepaths. On these plan-
ets, the sheer rarity of psychic powers and the limited 
chance that any one individual might be unlawfully 
scanned outweigh any fear of unchecked telepathic in-
trusion. Telepathic testimony is almost never accepted 
in a court of law, however, outside of the most psy -
chic-centered societies.
Almost all worlds forbid the uninvited use of tele-
pathic powers on another person. The crime is very dif-
ficult to prove, but usually comes with harsh penalties. 
Open admission of an illicit scan is generally considered 
proof, so PC telepaths are advised to be discreet.
Telepathic shielding devices and substances do 
exist in very limited amounts. Even during the height 
of the Mandate, such resources were never abundant. 
Nowadays, only heads of state and similar elite per -
sonages might expect to shelter behind psionics-proof 
walls or have devices to alert them to telepathic tam -
pering. Even then, many worlds will simply lack the 
pretech artifacts to erect such protection, even for their 
most important members.
Using and Detecting Telepathy
Telepathy operates at a very basic level of mental con-
tact, and is not impeded by a lack of shared languag -
es. While the basic forms of telepathy only function 
on intelligent creatures, aliens or transhumans with 
human-like cognition can be affected. VIs, True AIs, 
and other non-biological intelligences are not normally 
subject to Telepathy techniques.
Telepathy is a subtle ability, and targets of its tech-
nique will not normally be aware of it. Only those with 
metapsionic expertise or Telepathy-0 skill or greater 
can tell when they’ve been targeted by Telepathy. Oth-
ers may suspect this influence, particularly if they’re 
aware of the existence of psychics and have just done 
something utterly inexplicable to their own reasoning. 
Certain extremely rare TL5 devices can also alert a tar-
get to the presence of telepathic tampering.
Core Technique- Telepathic Contact
The telepath can obtain a progressively-deeper under-
standing of a sentient target’s thoughts. The target must 
be visible or otherwise perceptible to the telepath’s un-
aided senses. Opening a contact requires the telepath to 
Commit Effort for the day as a Main Action, and the 
contact lasts for a scene at most unless augmented by 
other techniques.
The depth of contact that can be made depends on 
the psychic’s Telepathy skill. A single contact can use 
any or all of the effects permitted to a telepath of the 
user’s skill level. Basic forms of contact do not allow for 
a saving throw, though more advanced probes allow 
the target to make a Mental saving throw to resist. On 
a successful save, no form of this technique that allows 
a save can be used on them for the rest of the scene.
Level-0: Observe emotional states in a target. Intense 
emotions provide a single word or image related 
to the focus of the feelings.
Level-1: A shallow gestalt with the target’s language cen-
ters allows the telepath to understand any form of 
communication made by the target. If the psychic 
has the requisite body parts to speak the target’s 
language, they can communicate with it in turn.
Level-2: The psychic’s awareness of the target’s surface 
cognition is sophisticated enough to read their 
current thoughts, though it can’t pick up memo-
ries or non-obvious connections. The target gets 
a Mental saving throw to resist this.
Level-3: The psychic can drill down into the target’s 
memory to get a one or two-sentence answer to 
any single question they ask, or receive a single 
answering vision of the target’s recollections. The 
target can attempt a Mental saving throw to resist 
this power, and whether or not it succeeds the 
contact is automatically ended. It can be re-estab-
lished, but only by activating this technique again.
Level-4: The psychic instantly gets a full and nuanced 
awareness of everything the target can remember 
about a particular topic. The target can attempt 
a Mental saving throw to resist this power, and 
whether or not it succeeds the contact is automat-
ically ended afterwards. It can be re-established, 
but only by activating this technique again.
Facile Mind Level-1
The telepath is practiced at opening a Telepathic Contact, 
and need only Commit Effort for the scene to do so, in-
stead of Committing Effort for the day. If contacting an 
ally who has practiced the process with the psychic for 
at least a week, opening the contact normally requires 
no Effort at all. In both cases, if the telepath chooses to 
Commit Effort for the day, they can open a Telepathic 
Contact as an Instant action rather than a Main Action.
===== PAGE 45 =====
Telepathic Control
Telepathy is not a discipline well-suited to direct 
mental control of other beings. While a telepath 
can impart urges and thoughts to a target, they 
lack the tools to assume direct control of a victim’s 
physical actions. The best they can do is implant 
ideas in the target’s head and try to hijack the 
short-term cognition of the victim.
Persistent legends speak of more direct dis -
ciplines practiced during the Mandate’s heyday. 
These arts supposedly allowed a psychic to take 
direct control of a subject’s physical form, manip-
ulating it with effortless ease to perform whatever 
acts the psychic desired. Unlike telepathy, how -
ever, these disciplines were unable to touch the 
cognitive centers of a target or read their mental 
activity. If any such disciplines ever existed, their 
possessors are doubtless very discreet with them.
telePathy •41 
Transmit Thought Level-1
The telepath can send thoughts and images over a Tele-
pathic Contact, allowing two-way communication with 
a willing target as an Instant action when desired.
Far Thought Level-2
Once a telepath has made a Telepathic Contact with a 
target, they can thereafter activate the technique when-
ever that target is within 100 kilometers, whether or 
not the psychic knows where they are. At Telepathy-3 
the range increases to 1,000 kilometers, and at Telepa-
thy-4 it extends over an entire planet and up to orbital 
distances. This distant connection is tenuous, however, 
and the psychic cannot use any technique through it 
that would allow the target a saving throw to resist.
Suppress Cognition Level-2
Through intense focus, the telepath can make the target 
of a Telepathic Contact simply not think about some -
thing, whether that’s the presence of the telepath, the 
possibility of committing violence, the absence of im-
portant documentation, or any other single potential 
action or one specific person. This technique requires 
the psychic to Commit Effort for the scene as a Main 
Action. The target gets a Mental saving throw to resist 
this power and become immune to it for the scene. If 
failed, the thought remains unthinkable for the rest of 
the scene unless the target perceives physical danger or 
a traumatic threat to something they prize highly. In 
that case, the block instantly dissolves and cannot be 
re-established during the scene. Once the effect ends, 
the target will remain oblivious to their temporary 
fugue unless it is brought to their attention somehow.
Reflex Response Level-3
As a Main Action, the telepath can Commit Effort for 
the day to force a sudden, irrational impulse into the 
target of a Telepathic Contact. The target may make a 
Mental saving throw to resist; on a failure, they will 
use their next available action to carry out the impulse 
to the best of their ability. This impulse cannot be 
self-injurious or harmful to a loved one, but it can be 
foolish, reckless, or harmful to others. The target may 
not understand why they have done the action, but will 
usually attempt to rationalize it as their choice.
Telepathic Assault Level-3
The telepath Commits Effort for the day as a Main 
Action to force a wave of metadimensional energy 
through the brain of a Telepathic Contact target. The 
assault does 6d6 damage, or 9d6 damage if the telepath 
has Telepathy-4 skill. The target may make a Mental 
saving throw to halve the damage. This assault cannot 
kill a target, but can knock them unconscious for an 
hour if they’re reduced to zero hit points, after which 
they wake up with one hit point. A victim cannot be 
targeted by an assault more than once per scene.
Memory Editing Level-4
The telepath can make simple edits to the memory of 
a target currently linked by a Telepathic Contact. Events 
of no more than 24 hours in duration can be erased 
from memory, conversations can be created or changed, 
new events can be added to a day, or other similar al-
terations made. The psychic can make these changes 
as a Main Action by Committing Effort for the day. If 
the psychic doesn’t have a good understanding of the 
memories they’re changing, such as might be granted 
by the level-4 degree of Telepathic Contact, the edits they 
make may not fit well. The target gets a Mental saving 
throw to resist editing for the rest of the scene, but on 
a failure, they will not notice the changed memories 
until given a reason to recollect them.
Unity of Thought Level-4
The telepath becomes exceptionally skilled at weaving 
together multiple allied minds. When they establish a 
Telepathic Contact with a willing ally they may bind up to 
six willing participants into the same contact without 
further Effort. This multi-person link is relatively shal-
low, and allows only the Instant exchange of thoughts, 
images, and sensory impressions. While under its ef -
fect, every participant knows the exact location and 
condition of all others, and uses the best Initiative roll 
of any of them if combat commences. At the table, up 
to five minutes of discussion and coordination among 
the players can be arranged each round without incur-
ring delays for the PCs. Every combat turn, one gestalt 
member of the psychic’s choice gets an extra round of 
action to represent the benefits of the perfect coordina-
tion of the group. The psychic cannot gain this bonus 
round himself. The telepathic link lasts as long as the 
psychic initiates no new Telepathic Contact, and it has a 
range that extends to any point within a solar system.
===== PAGE 46 =====
42• telePortation
TelePorTaTIon
Teleporters do not provoke the kind of persistent 
worry that telepaths induce in most normals, but their 
particular gifts cause a more physical concern. An ex-
perienced teleporter can reach or see into any location 
they’ve ever been; security officials don’t just need to 
make sure that no teleporter is in a restricted area, but 
that they’ve never been there before at any time. Access 
into the most important areas is carefully filtered to 
ensure that no outside teleporter ever gets a chance to 
see a location they might suddenly appear in several 
months or years later.
Most governments with access to trained psychics 
will have at least a few expert teleporters on hand to 
provide untraceable communications links and super -
lative infiltrators. Despite their many advantages in in-
trusion and evasion, however, a teleporter needs the 
skills to actually get into a restricted area before they 
can take advantage of a quick escape. It’s not unknown 
for teleporters to be paired with more conventional 
burglars who supply the security-defeating skills and 
information-gathering talents that a professional psy-
chic doesn’t always have the time to cultivate.
The criminal applications of teleportation are ob-
vious, as is its utility in surveillance. Some bold tele -
porters make excellent money as thieves or spies for 
whatever employer can afford their exorbitant fees. 
The price for their services is invariably high, not only 
due to the rarity of experienced teleporters, but due to 
the consequences of arrest.
As tempting as the criminal path can be for many 
teleporters, most are dissuaded by the penalties. Very 
few worlds have prison facilities that are in any way de-
signed to cope with teleporting inmates. On advanced 
worlds, this means that criminal teleporters are often 
implanted with surgical bombs keyed to explode if they 
leave a restricted area or stop receiving a specific signal 
from a government transmitter. On primitive worlds, 
this means that criminal teleporters face summary exe-
cution for any crime more serious than a misdemeanor.
Some devices can be used to defeat teleporters, 
creating a curdled patch of metadimensional space 
that is impossible to enter or leave via teleportation. 
These ancient pretech artifacts are invariably ridicu -
lously expensive in the unlikely case that a planetary 
government allows them to remain in private hands at 
all, and only the most important figures of an advanced 
world will have any access to teleporter-sealed “safe 
zones”. Many worlds have no access to such devices at 
all, with even princes and potentates left to keep a wary 
eye on teleporting psychics. A metapsion brainguard is 
the usual low-tech answer to psychic threats, if such an 
expensive mercenary can be hired on the world.
Core Technique- Personal Apportation
The teleporter can translocate to another location they 
have either occupied before or can see with their unaid-
ed vision. Locations are fixed in reference to the nearest 
major gravity well. For example, it is not possible to 
teleport to the cockpit of a distant moving vehicle they 
once occupied, but they can teleport to another point 
on a planet’s surface even though the planet has since 
moved far through the stellar void.
The core technique allows the teleporter to move 
himself and any mass he is able to carry with his own 
natural strength. Resisting targets cannot be carried 
along, and unresisting ones must be touched. A tele -
porter can leave any clothing, shackles, adhesions, or 
other matter behind when he teleports, but he cannot 
leave behind matter that has been inserted into his 
body, such as cybernetics or shrapnel. Matter cannot 
be partially left behind.
A teleporter will instinctively abort any apporta -
tion that would leave him embedded in a solid object 
or in an environment of imminent physical harm. Any 
Committed Effort on such aborted jumps is wasted, as 
is any action spent triggering the power.
The maximum range of Personal Apportation de -
pends on the teleporter’s skill level. Teleporting with 
Personal Apportation counts as a Main Action and re -
quires that the psychic Commit Effort for the scene.
Level-0: The psychic can teleport up to 10 meters.
Level-1: The psychic can teleport up to 100 meters.
Level-2: The psychic can teleport up to 10 kilometers.
Level-3: The psychic can teleport up to 1,000 kilometers.
Level-4: The psychic can teleport anywhere on a plan-
et’s surface or near orbit.
Proficient Apportation Level-1
Personal Apportation now counts as a Move action, 
though it still can be performed only once per round. 
Apportations of 10 meters or less no longer require 
Effort to be Committed, though any augments to the 
technique must still be paid for normally.
Spatial Awareness Level-1
The psychic may Commit Effort as an On Turn ac -
tion to gain an intuitive 360-degree awareness of their 
physical surroundings. The sense is roughly equivalent 
to sight out to 100 meters, though it cannot read text 
or distinguish colors. It is blocked by solid objects but 
is unimpeded by darkness, mist, blinding light, holo -
grams, or optical illusions. The sense lasts as long as the 
Effort remains Committed to the technique.
===== PAGE 47 =====
telePortation •43 
Burdened Apportation Level-2
The psychic can carry willing companions with them 
when using Personal Apportation. Up to three hu -
man-sized companions and their man-portable gear 
may be carried per skill level in Teleportation. Allies 
must be within 3 meters of the teleporter to be carried 
along. Ordinary inert matter cannot be carried along 
unless the psychic is touching it or it’s being carried by 
an ally affected by this power. If carrying inert mass, up 
to two hundred kilos of objects can be carried per skill 
level. Using this technique increases the Effort cost of 
Personal Apportation, requiring that an extra point of 
Effort be Committed for the day.
Perceptive Dislocation Level-2
Commit Effort for the day to sense any location the 
psychic could teleport to. The psychic perceives the 
location as if there, lasting for fifteen minutes at most.
Spatial Synchrony Mandala Level-2
The psychic imprints a particular object or person on 
their psionic awareness. Provided the object is relative-
ly intact and in range of their Personal Apportation, the 
psychic always knows its exact location and can teleport 
to within three meters of it with Personal Apportation 
even if it has moved from its original location. Im -
printing an object requires an hour’s meditation with 
it, and only one object can be imprinted at a time. If 
imprinting on a person, the target must be willing and 
cooperative to make the imprint. Objects must be at 
least one kilogram in mass to be effectively tracked.
Effortless Apportation Level-3
The psychic does not need to Commit Effort to use 
Personal Apportation. If the technique is augmented by 
other techniques that come with their own extra or in-
creased cost, however, this extra cost must still be paid.
Stutterjump Level-3
The psychic can instinctively micro-teleport away from 
incoming danger. As an On Turn action they may 
Commit Effort to begin shifting their spatial position 
away from attacks, gaining a base Armor Class of 20 
so long as the Effort remains Committed. This Armor 
Class is not modified by armor, shields, or Dexterity 
modifiers, and the micro-jumps do not significantly 
move the psychic from their current location. While 
Stutterjump is active, as an Instant action the adept may 
Commit Effort for the day to negate a successful hit by 
a weapon attack, even after damage has been rolled. 
This reflexive defensive jump may be used only once 
per day and leaves the psychic just outside the radius 
of explosions or other area-effect attacks.
Rift Reduplication Level-3
Expert teleporters can be infuriatingly difficult to pin 
down. By Committing an additional Effort for the day 
as an Instant action, the adept can use Personal Apporta-
tion as an On Turn action, even if they’ve already used it 
once this round. Apporting itself costs whatever Effort 
it normally would, in addition to any techniques that 
augment it. Rift Reduplication can only be triggered once 
per round.
If the adept uses their powers to teleport into a 
location, perform an action, and then use Rift Redupli-
cation to teleport back out, onlookers in the area will 
not have time to react to their action or attack the adept 
unless the onlookers have held their action explicitly 
to counter the psychic. Enemies who hold their action 
this way waste it entirely if the psychic does not give 
them a chance to attack or otherwise interfere. Such a 
lightning strike may be surprising to onlookers, but it 
doesn’t allow enough preparation time to count as an 
Execution Attack as described on page 52.
Deep Intrusion Level-4
The adept can use Personal Apportation to blind-teleport 
into a building, structure, vehicle, or spaceship visible 
to them, including spaceships close enough to engage 
in conventional ship-to-ship combat. They intuitively 
seek out a space large enough to hold them and without 
immediate environmental hazards, but cannot control 
their precise destination. Using this technique in con-
junction with Personal Apportation is very draining to 
the psychic, and requires that they Commit an addi -
tional Effort point for the day.
Offensive Apportation Level-4
The psychic can use Personal Apportation as a Main Ac-
tion to teleport an unwilling target, provided the user 
can make physical contact with them. Contact with an 
unsuspecting or incapacitated target is automatic, while 
touching a resisting enemy requires a Punch hit roll 
with a bonus equal to the psychic’s Teleportation skill. 
If the psychic does not use the Burdened Apportation 
technique then only the target is teleported; otherwise 
the user may go along with them. The psychic cannot 
teleport a target to any location they could not tele -
port to, including locations of imminent environmen-
tal danger, such as high in the air, into a windowless 
tomb, or into the middle of a sea. A conscious, resist -
ing target can make a Mental saving throw to forcibly 
abort the teleportation, rolling at a penalty equal to 
the psychic’s Teleportation skill. Use of this technique 
adds to the cost of Personal Apportation, requiring the 
psychic Commit an additional point of Effort for the 
day whether the touch hits or not.
===== PAGE 48 =====

===== PAGE 49 =====
SYSTEMS
Even the most capable interstellar adventurer some -
times encounters a situation where the outcome is by 
no means certain. When an alien assassin thrusts a 
blade at an unguarded back, or the ship threatens to 
careen out of control in a gas giant’s upper atmosphere, 
or when the hero has been critically injured and lies 
bleeding on a cavern floor, how do you tell what’s going 
to happen next? This chapter provides you with certain 
basic systems you can use to resolve these questions.
The Basic Mechanics
The three primary systems that most heroes are go -
ing to interact with most often are skill checks, sav -
ing throws, and combat rounds. Every player and GM 
ought to read those sections and understand the basic 
mechanisms involved, because they’re going to be see-
ing a lot of them in their star-faring adventures.
Skill checks tell you whether or not your hero suc-
ceeds at a particular feat of expertise or natural com -
petence. Whenever it’s uncertain whether or not your 
hero can manage a feat, your GM might call for a skill 
check. Failure at the roll means that your hero either 
botched it outright, succeeded in a way that was sin -
gularly unhelpful, or was foiled by some unexpected 
outside influence. 
Saving throws tell you whether or not your hero 
evades some immediate peril. If you need to know 
whether or not the alien insect’s poison overwhelms 
you, or if you can dive away from the grenade before 
it explodes, or if the villainous psychic’s mind-reading 
powers can pry out your secrets, you make a saving 
throw. The GM will tell you when you should be mak-
ing one.
Combat rounds tell you whether or not your hero 
has shot, stabbed, exploded, maimed, punched, or oth-
erwise ventilated their foe, and whether the foe has 
managed to do the same to them. Combat in Stars 
Without Number is very dangerous, especially to novice 
adventurers and ordinary NPCs. One thug with a pistol 
and a steady hand can kill most newly-minted heroes 
with a single well-aimed bullet, and most normal men 
and women have even less of a chance against lethal 
violence. Warrior heroes and others with a specific tal-
ent for combat are more durable against these martial 
perils, but even they have to respect the threat of a mob 
of angry spearmen or a sniper rifle’s crosshairs.
The combat section is a particularly important 
read if your own gaming history has lent itself more 
towards games that have very sturdy protagonists or 
narratively-shielded player characters. A first-level 
Warrior in Stars Without Number is lethally dangerous 
to an ordinary street thug or faceless enemy minion, 
but three or four mooks with street-built slugthrowers 
are likely to put that budding hero down hard. More 
experienced PCs gain a larger margin of safety as they 
gain more hit points, but there’s no PC that can laugh 
off a dozen combat infantrymen with mag rifles and a 
will to use them. Don’t assume your character is going 
to survive an experience just because they’re a PC.
Using the Systems
Stars Without Number is built to support a sandbox 
gaming experience, and the systems in this chapter 
are part of that. By default, they’re meant to be fair, 
understandable, and flexible enough to be applied to 
many situations. They’re not meant to especially fa -
vor the PCs, however, or to give them ways to bypass 
the results of some poor decision or unlucky moment. 
There is no “narrative currency” the player can spend 
to avert disaster. This is not the only way a group can 
play the game, but it is intentionally the default mode.
It’s not that these systems are perfect, but that 
they are an unbiased third party to your gaming ses -
sion. When the GM calls for a skill check, or rolls a hit 
roll for an alien warlord’s chainaxe, he honestly doesn’t 
know what’s going to happen. His judgment might ap-
ply bonuses or penalties to the dice, or he might choose 
to tweak the system to fit the immediate situation, but 
ultimately the dice are resolving the situation. This is 
important for a sandbox game, because the dice are as 
fair as they are merciless.
This fairness adds surprise and interest to a night’s 
gaming. Even the GM isn’t completely certain what’s 
going to happen when the PCs forge ahead, and this 
surprise and novelty help keep the GM interested in 
events, and not just a programmatic maestro for pre-
set situations and outcomes. Every gaming session is 
a chance for something unexpected to boil out of a 
chance throw of the dice, whether that happens when 
the PCs catastrophically botch their attempt to defuse 
a nuclear fission bomb or when that alien warlord just 
happens to catch a ten-kilo demolitions charge with 
his chestplate. Even when cruel dice fell a heroic PC, 
that very degree of danger helps make the rest of the 
party’s survival more meaningful. They lived because 
they made good choices and had a bare minimum of 
luck, not because they were the designated heroes.
Not all groups will want to play the game this way, 
however, and that too is perfectly acceptable. Some 
groups do want to let Fate weigh in on their side, and 
let death and disaster have to get through a little more 
narrative armor first. A GM running a game like this 
can often produce this effect without the need for ex-
plicitly changing die rolls or introducing destiny chips, 
simply by deciding on gentler outcomes for failures, 
minimizing murder-obsessed enemies, and explicitly 
arranging escape routes for overmatched PCs. This 
game belongs to you and your group, and you should 
run it the way you want it to be run.
===== PAGE 50 =====
Poison and Peril
While cutting their way through the blue jungles 
of Qinglin, a luxuriant blossom of cerulean crystal 
catches Eden’s eye. The young adventuress is eager 
to find something to make their reeking weeks in 
this azure Hell worthwhile for her and her brother 
Randall, but she’s no fool, and promptly extends her 
3.048-meter probe pole to gently joggle the bloom 
from a safe distance away.
The two adventurers are so focused on their 
examination of the flower that they risk missing the 
stealthy creep of a many-legged creature that ap -
proaches through the undergrowth. The GM calls 
for Wis/Notice skill checks from both of the PCs. 
Eden’s Wisdom modifier of +0 and lack of the Notice 
skill leave her with a -1 penalty. She rolls 2d6 and 
gets a 6. Her brother Randall has a Wisdom modifier 
of +1 and Notice-0 skill, which gives him a net +1 
bonus on his roll, and a result of 11.
The GM decides that sneaking through the 
undergrowth is a sort of thing that venomous alien 
hunters would be good at, so he applies the creature’s 
+1 skill bonus to its own stealth roll. Unfortunately 
for the young heroes, it rolls a 12, approaching the 
pair undetected.
The GM rolls randomly to see which of the pair 
is closest and finds that Randall is the unlucky win-
ner. The dog-sized monstrosity leaps on the psychic 
and stabs him with its venomous proboscis.
The GM knows that the poison of this dread 
beast is enough to kill an unlucky victim in a matter 
of minutes. But did Randall receive a lethal dose? He 
asks Randall’s player to make a Physical saving throw.
The psychic’s Physical saving throw target is 14, 
so his player reaches for a d20 and rolls, coming up 
with a natural 20 on the dice. A natural 20 is always 
a success, even if penalties would otherwise make 
the roll a failure.
Randall staggers under the attack, but most of 
the beast’s poison stains his armor harmlessly. He’s 
shaky, but can push through the dose he got with no 
ill effects. That’s a good thing, because that scuttler’s 
egg-mate is hurrying up through the brush…
46• SyStemS
sCenes and duraTIons
Many psychic abilities and other powers have durations 
expressed in scenes. A scene is just a shorthand concept 
for a particular action sequence or exertion on the part 
of the PCs. A single combat encounter is a scene, as is 
the infiltration of a building, the ascent of a radioactive 
mountainside, or a tense meeting with an alien over-
lord’s cybernetic representative. Most scenes don’t last 
for longer than fifteen minutes or a single contiguous 
chunk of action, but the maximum duration is up to 
the GM’s discretion. It’s quite possible to have an eve-
ning’s play where most of the time isn’t tracked, only 
marking scenes for important negotiations, gunfire, or 
time-critical feats of skill.
Some powers are limited to being used only so 
many times in a given scene, or require Effort expen-
ditures that only come back at the end of the scene. 
Outside of situations where close time-tracking is im-
portant, you can assume that these powers can be used 
or that the Effort comes back about once every fifteen 
minutes, assuming the PC has intervals for rest.
saVIng ThroWs
There are times when misfortune or unpredictable per-
il befalls a hero. Only luck or their own natural har -
diness can save them from disaster, and to do so they 
must make a saving throw. 
Saving throws come in three kinds. Physical saves 
relate to challenges of physical endurance such as poi-
sons, diseases, radiation, or dire exhaustion. Evasion 
saves involve dodging explosions, evading falling haz-
ards, diving back from a crumbling surface, or other -
wise exerting one’s powers of speed and swift reaction. 
Mental saves relate most often to psychic influences, 
hallucinations, esoteric mental control technologies, 
and other perils that assault a hero’s mind or percep -
tions. Mental saves can also be used when no other 
saving throw category seems to apply and only blind 
luck and ineffable intuition can save the hero.
Your character’s saving throw scores start at 15, 
and decrease by one point each time you advance a 
level. Each saving throw is modified by the best mod -
ifier of two different attributes: Physical by the better 
of Strength or Constitution, Evasion by the better of 
Dexterity or Intelligence, and Mental by the better of 
Charisma or Wisdom. Thus, a first-level PC with a 
Strength of 5 and a Constitution of 14 would have a 
Physical save of 14.
To make a save, roll 1d20 and try to equal or beat 
the appropriate saving throw score. On a success, you 
evade or mitigate the peril, while on a failure it takes 
full effect. A natural roll of 1 is always a failure, and a 
natural roll of 20 is always a success.
The GM decides when a saving throw is appropri-
ate. Some dangers might not allow one at all.
===== PAGE 51 =====
Skill CheCkS •47 Skill CheCkS •47 
skIll CheCks
Most characters are skilled, competent men and wom-
en who are perfectly capable of carrying out the ordi-
nary duties of their role. Sometimes, however, they are 
faced with a situation or challenge beyond the usual 
scope of their role and must make a skill check.
To make a skill check, roll 2d6 and add the most 
relevant skill level and attribute modifier. If the total is 
equal or higher than the check’s difficulty, the check is a 
success. On a failure, the PC either can’t accomplish the 
feat at all or they achieve it at the cost of some further 
complication to the situation. The GM determines the 
specific outcome of a failure.
If the character doesn’t even have level-0 in the 
pertinent skill, they suffer a -1 penalty to the roll. In 
the case of particularly technical or esoteric skills they 
might not even be able to attempt the skill check at all.
Some checks might be suitable for more than 
one skill. A javelin-throwing contest might use Exert 
for being an athletic contest, or Shoot for involving a 
ranged weapon, or Stab for using a muscle-powered 
thrown weapon. In such cases the PC can use the best 
applicable skill. In other situations, a skill might seem 
peripherally relevant; trying to find the hidden bomb 
in a starship’s engine core before it detonates might cer-
tainly use Notice or Fix, but a GM might also let Pilot 
be applied, as a veteran pilot might be expected to know 
what their engine should look like. In such peripheral 
cases, the check difficulty usually increases by 2.
Particularly helpful or hostile circumstances might 
give a bonus or penalty to the skill check. As a general 
rule, extremely bad circumstances or tools would ap -
ply up to a -2 penalty to the skill check, while a very 
good situation or the perfect set of tools might give up 
to a +2 bonus to the roll. Usually, no combination of 
modifiers should add more than +2 or -2 to any given 
skill check.
When To Call for a Check
Skill checks should only be called for challenges that fall 
outside the PC’s background and common experience. 
A PC with the background of a starship pilot should 
not be rolling skill checks to land a ship or navigate to 
an in-system destination. As a general rule of thumb, 
if failure at a particular task would make the PC seem 
notably incompetent at their role in life, then they 
shouldn’t have to roll a skill check for it. In addition, if 
failure or success at a check really doesn’t matter in the 
game, if it won’t produce some interesting result either 
way, then a check shouldn’t be made.
Even concept-related feats might require a skill 
check, however, if the situation is especially bad or 
the circumstances particularly hostile. The pilot might 
have to make a Pilot skill check to land a ship if they 
attempt it in the middle of a man-killing sandstorm, 
and a noble might have to make a Connect skill check 
to find shelter with an aristocratic relation if they’re 
currently wanted by the stellar tyrant’s guards.
Aiding a Skill Check
Sometimes one PC will want to lend a hand to another 
as they attempt a difficult feat. To do this, the player 
first describes what sort of action they are taking to 
help their comrade. If the GM agrees that their effort 
makes sense and would be helpful, the player then rolls 
a relevant skill check against the same difficulty as the 
original check. If it’s a success, the other PC gets a +1 
bonus on their roll. Multiple PCs can try to help, but 
the acting PC can’t earn more than a +1 total bonus.
The helping skill doesn’t necessarily have to be the 
same skill the PC is checking. If a player can think of 
a way to help a Sneak check with Talk, then so be it.
Opposed Skill Checks
Sometimes a PC wants to accomplish something that 
another character wants to prevent. Sneaking past an 
alert guard, winning a shooting tournament, or besting 
an alien in a tentacle-wrestling competition might all 
be opposed skill checks.
In such cases, all participants roll their relevant 
skills and the highest score wins, with ties going to 
the PC. To make the NPC’s roll, check their listed skill 
bonus; they can add it to any skill check appropriate to 
their role or profession. If the NPC has no reason to 
be particularly good at the challenge, they simply roll 
2d6 and add nothing.
In most cases, the relevant skills are obvious. A 
character trying to skulk past a vigilant guard would be 
rolling their Dex/Sneak against the guard’s roll, while 
one trying to out-tentacle an alien would be rolling Str/
Exert. When in doubt, the GM decides which skill is 
most applicable.
Skill Check Difficulties
6 A relatively simple task that is still more than 
the PC would usually be expected to manage 
in their regular background. Anything easier 
than this isn’t worth a skill check.
8 A significant challenge to a competent profes-
sional that they’d still succeed at more often 
than not.
10 Something too difficult to be expected of 
anyone but a skilled expert, and even they 
might fail.
12 Only a true master could expect to carry this 
off with any degree of reliability.
14+ Only a true master has any chance of achiev -
ing this at all, and even they will probably fail.
===== PAGE 52 =====
48• Combat
CombaT
Sometimes the only reasonable response to a situation 
involves drawn monoblades and heavy plasma fire. In 
such unfortunate hours your heroes will have to en -
gage in combat.
Combat in Stars Without Number is a lethal sort of 
experience, especially for novice interstellar adventur-
ers. Even hardened Warriors can go down in a hurry 
under a withering hail of mag rifle fire or the scrap-
steel knives of a hiveworld gang pack. PCs should be 
very certain that the odds are in their favor before they 
reach for their laser pistols, and even then, the gods of 
battle can be cruel.
Rounds and Initiative
Combat and other time-sensitive situations are divided 
up into rounds. Each round is approximately six sec -
onds, during which all participants may act. When ev-
eryone has acted, the round ends and a new one begins.
To determine who acts first in a round, each par-
ticipant rolls initiative. Each rolls 1d8 and adds their 
Dexterity modifier. NPCs usually have no modifier. 
The participants then act in order, high roll to low, 
with PCs winning ties. When everyone has had a turn 
to act, the sequence starts over again from the top. Ini-
tiative is not re-rolled.
Optionally, the GM may choose to use group ini-
tiative instead in their campaigns. The PC with the best 
Dexterity bonus rolls for the party, and the GM rolls 
one die for the other NPCs. Members of the side that 
rolled highest may act first in whatever order they wish, 
and then the next-highest side acts. While easier to 
manage, it also increases the value of winning initiative, 
and can leave the heroes in dire peril if a large group 
of foes wins the roll.
Sometimes a person is surprised or ambushed. 
Most ambushes involve a contested Dex/Sneak roll 
against a target’s Wis/Notice check, with the defender 
winning ties. In other cases the surprise may be prac-
tically inevitable, such as a disguised assassin suddenly 
lashing out with a monoblade in the middle of a society 
ball. Ambush targets who fail the contested roll are sur-
prised. A surprised target doesn’t get to roll initiative 
until the second round of combat and can perform only 
Instant actions while surprised. NPCs with roles rele-
vant to being vigilant or stealthy would gain their skill 
bonus to these checks, while others would simply roll 
an unmodified 2d6 for the opposed check.
Most PCs are not subject to surprise unless their 
guard is genuinely down at the moment of the ambush 
or attack. Someone walking in a dangerous part of a 
city or picking their way through a seemingly-aban -
doned space station is unlikely to be astonished by the 
sudden appearance of danger, unless the attack is so 
sudden and from such an unexpected quarter that even 
their obvious caution is insufficient.
Types of Actions
When an actor’s turn comes up in the round, they may 
perform actions. Actions are divided into four different 
types: Main Actions, Moves, On Turn actions, or Instant.
Main Action One per Turn
Every actor can make one Main Action each round. 
Main Actions are those deeds that are going to absorb 
most of the six-second round, such as attacking an en-
emy, bracing a door, applying first aid to a downed ally, 
digging a Stowed item out of a pack, manipulating a 
complex device, or some other activity that takes up 
their focus. In place of their Main Action, an actor can 
take a second Move action.
Move Action One per Turn
Every actor can make one Move action each round, 
running up to 10 meters. This movement assumes that 
an actor is dodging enemies, paying attention to the 
surroundings, navigating awkward terrain, and gener-
ally dealing with the hazards of a battlefield. Climbing 
a surface, swimming, or passing extremely rough ter-
rain halves this movement rate. Actors can’t split their 
Move action, such as taking part of it before using their 
Main Action and the rest afterwards.
An actor who wants to disengage from an oppo -
nent in melee must use their Main Action to perform 
a Fighting Withdrawal, or else they suffer a free auto -
matic melee attack from any foe engaged with them. 
There is no need to spend a Main Action disengaging 
from enemies who are wielding only ranged weapons. 
While it’s possible to use a rifle to buttstroke someone 
or pistol-whip a near combatant, such weapons aren’t 
as effectively threatening as true melee weapons.
On Turn Action Any Amount on Your Turn
An On Turn action is some fast, simple act that could 
reasonably be performed while an actor is doing some-
thing else. Dropping an object, falling prone, saying 
something, drawing a Readied item, or activating a 
simple device might all be On Turn actions. A PC can 
perform as many On Turn actions as they want in a 
round, subject to the GM’s discretion.
Instant Action Any Amount, Any Time
An Instant action is special, in that it can be performed 
even when it’s not the actor’s turn, or even after at -
tacks or damage have already been rolled. Some psychic 
powers are Instant actions, allowing the actor to use 
them after they decide they don’t like how the dice have 
fallen. Certain combat actions are also Instant, though 
they often cost the actor’s Main Action for the round as 
well. Any number of Instant actions can be performed 
during a round.
===== PAGE 53 =====
Combat •49 
Hitting an Enemy
When an actor wants to hurt a target, they need to use 
their Main Action to make an attack roll. An attack roll 
represents not just one shot or swing, but the assailant 
spending their round trying to get in a good hit or a 
clean shot at the target.
To make an attack roll, the assailant rolls 1d20 and 
adds their attack bonus, their applicable skill level, and 
the attribute modifier most relevant to the weapon. 
If the total is equal or higher than the target’s Armor 
Class, the attack is successful.
A PC’s attack bonus is usually equal to half their 
character level, rounded down. Characters with the 
Warrior class or an Adventurer with the Partial War-
rior class option have higher base attack bonuses. NPCs 
have their own attack bonus listed with their statistics, 
which includes any modifiers they might have.
A PC’s skill level is their Punch, Stab, or Shoot 
skill in most cases, depending on what kind of weapon 
they’re using. In rare cases, a different skill might be 
involved, such as Pilot for the guns of a light starfighter. 
If a PC doesn’t even have level-0 expertise in the type 
of weapon they’re using, they suffer a -2 penalty on hit 
rolls for unfamiliarity with it.
A PC’s attribute modifier depends on the weapon. 
For ranged weapons, this is usually Dexterity, while 
smaller melee weapons might use Strength or Dexter-
ity, and large ones might rely on Strength alone. If a 
weapon has more than one attribute listed, use the best.
A successful attack inflicts hit point damage equal 
to the weapon’s damage die plus the relevant attribute 
modifier. Thus, a hero with a +1 Dexterity modifier 
firing a laser pistol that does 1d6 damage would inflict 
1d6+1 hit points of damage on a hit. Skill levels do not 
add to damage unless it is a Punch attack.
Some melee weapons apply Shock, and are guaran-
teed to do some degree of harm to a target. A weapon’s 
Shock quality lists the number of points of damage it 
inflicts on any target with an Armor Class equal or 
less than the one given. Thus, a primitive knife with a 
Shock score of “1 point/AC 15” would always do at least 
1 point of damage whenever its wielder attacks a target 
with AC 15 or less, whether they hit or miss.
Shock damage always adds the wielder’s attribute 
modifier and any other bonuses that might apply from 
weapon mods, foci, or other advanced tech. Some ad-
vanced armor will always protect completely against 
primitive weapons, however, and some advanced 
weapons can ignore primitive gear, treating it as AC 10.
A successful attack doesn’t always mean a direct 
physical hit. A flurry of strokes that force an enemy 
off-balance, graze him, frighten him, or exhaust him 
might all drain his hit points, bringing him closer to 
defeat without actually inflicting real physical harm. 
Only the last handful of hit points reflect serious bodily 
damage. It’s up to the GM and player to decide how to 
describe the effects of a successful hit.
Hit Roll Modifiers
Sometimes it can be easier or harder to connect with 
a blow depending on the combat situation. The table 
below offers some suggested hit roll modifiers for com-
mon combat circumstances. 
Finding cover is often critical in a gun battle. Gen-
erally, firing around a convenient corner or shooting 
over sandbags would qualify as half cover, while fir -
ing through slits or from carefully-prepared bunkers 
would allow for full cover. Melee attackers can usually 
ignore cover, as they get too close for their target to 
take proper advantage of it. Being prone doesn’t stack 
with hard cover, but sometimes the available cover is 
so low that the hero has to be flat to benefit from it.
A gunman who can set up a prepared firing po -
sition can get a significant advantage. Such a position 
usually requires at least five minutes of sighting and set-
ting up a rest. Most such positions provide some cover.
Circumstance Mod
Shooting at a distant prone foe -2
Shooting or meleeing an adjacent prone foe +2
Melee attacking while prone -4
The target is at least half behind cover -2
The target is almost completely in cover -4
Shooting from a prepared firing position +2
===== PAGE 54 =====
50• Combat
Common aCTIons In CombaT
While a PC can do anything they might reasonably 
accomplish in six seconds as their Main Action for a 
round, some choices are more common than others. 
Below are a list of some of the tactics or actions that 
come up most often in combat.
Make a Melee Attack Main Action
The combatant attacks an enemy within melee range, 
rolling a normal hit roll and inflicting damage on a 
successful hit. Most melee attacks inflict Shock damage 
on a miss, if the target’s Armor Class is low enough, and 
no successful hit does less damage than the weapon’s 
Shock would have done on a miss. An attacker’s weap-
on must be Readied in order to attack with it.
Make a Ranged Attack Main Action
The combatant fires or throws a Readied ranged weap-
on at a target. The combatant can’t Make a Ranged 
Attack with a two-handed weapon if there’s a enemy 
armed with a melee weapon within melee range; it’s 
too easy for the assailant to bind up a rifle-sized gun. 
One-handed ranged weapons and thrown weapons can 
still be used, albeit at a -4 penalty to hit.
Make a Snap Attack Instant Action
A combatant with a Ready weapon can rush their attack, 
sacrificing accuracy for speed. The combatant must still 
have their Main Action impending or available. As an 
Instant, they can sacrifice it to Make a Melee Attack  or 
Make a Ranged Attack against a foe in range, whether a 
snap shot with a pistol or a quick thrust at an adjacent 
melee foe. This attack takes a -4 penalty to its hit roll. 
If multiple combatants decide to make Snap Attacks at 
the same time, they are resolved simultaneously.
Snap Attacks are usually made only by the desper-
ate, the undisciplined, or the elite, and the GM should 
rarely have NPCs employ them. Untrained hooligans 
might blaze away in excitement or panic, or a gunman 
being charged by a howling spearman might risk a shot 
before he gets too close, but most combatants can’t af-
ford to take such a heavy penalty to their hit roll. Truly 
skilled combatants, however, can sometimes get away 
with such risks, particularly if they have a Warrior’s 
class ability to turn a miss into a hit. 
Total Defense Instant Action
As an Instant action, the combatant focuses on nothing 
other than avoiding knives, gunfire, hurled crystalline 
spears, or other perils in the vicinity. Using Total De-
fense costs the user their Main Action for the round, 
and cannot be used if they’ve already employed their 
Main Action. They become immune to Shock damage 
for the round from melee weapons, regardless of their 
Armor Class, and gain a +2 bonus to their Armor Class 
until their next turn.
Club Up a Weapon Move Action
A combatant can shift their grip on a Readied rifle or 
pistol, using it as a crude melee weapon rather than a 
ranged weapon. Rifle-sized guns used this way count 
as a medium primitive weapon with no Shock score, 
and pistol-sized guns count as a small primitive weap-
on with no Shock score. Rolling maximum damage on 
a hit with such improvised weapons will break them. 
This action can also be taken to unclub a weapon and 
ready it to shoot.
Run Move Action
The combatant moves their normal combat movement 
rate, which is 10 meters for most humans. If they’re 
climbing a surface, swimming, or navigating extremely 
rough terrain, this movement rate is halved, and they 
might have to make an Exert skill check to achieve even 
that. Prone characters crab along at half this rate.
Fighting Withdrawal Main Action
The combatant disengages from any melee foes around 
them. They don’t actually move away, but they can now 
get away from their assailants without giving them a 
free melee attack. Usually, this means the combatant 
uses their Move action to get clear, because if they just 
stand there the enemies might choose to re-engage 
them the next round.
Use a Skill Main Action
The combatant uses a skill that could be plausibly ap-
plied in a few seconds. An Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill 
check to stabilize a wounded comrade is one such po-
tential use, as is executing a pre-programmed hack, 
shouting out a stirring rallying cry to timorous NPC 
allies, or anything else that might be done quickly.
Ready or Stow an Item Main Action
The combatant draws a weapon, extracts an item from 
their backpack, digs a magazine out of a belt pouch, 
or otherwise moves an object around on their person. 
They can Ready an item this way or Stow it.
Reload a Weapon Main Action
The combatant swaps a Readied power cell or magazine 
into their weapon. Some very primitive firearms might 
require more than one action to load them, while an 
archer can nock another arrow as a Move action.
Drop an Item Instant Action
The combatant drops something they’re holding. They 
can do this Instantly at any time to free up their hands.
===== PAGE 55 =====
Examples of Murder
Yaddle and Bort, two drunken hive thugs, get in -
volved in an impromptu knife fight over a card 
game. Yaddle wins the initiative roll, but Bort elects 
to make a Snap Attack, since Yaddle is within conve-
nient range of Bort’s Readied knife. Incensed, Yaddle 
also decides to make a Snap Attack, so the two re -
solve their attacks simultaneously.
Bort has a hit bonus of +1. Being an NPC, he 
doesn’t add skills or attribute modifiers; he just rolls 
1d20, adds 1 to it for his attack bonus, and applies a 
-4 penalty for a Snap Attack to find the Armor Class 
he hits. His modified roll is 11, which is enough to 
hit the unarmored Yaddle, who has an AC of 10. Bort 
rolls 1d4 for his small, primitive knife, inflicting 3 
points of damage. Again, as an NPC, he doesn’t add 
attribute modifiers to the damage.
Yaddle has a similar hit bonus, but his modified 
roll is 7, less than Bort’s unarmored AC of 10, so he 
misses. His primitive knife does do 1 point of Shock 
damage to Bort, however, because a small primitive 
weapon does its Shock damage to any target with an 
AC of 15 or less.
With the attacks resolved simultaneously, both 
now take damage. Yaddle takes 3 points, and as he 
only had 3 hit points to begin with, he’s down and 
dying, spurting from several vicious slashes. Bort 
takes 1 damage from Shock, and since he was always 
a frail gutter rat with only 1 hit point, he too is down, 
slipping into shock from a gash in his belly. Luckily, 
he owes an onlooker money, so his creditor rushes 
forward and tries to hold Bort’s guts in with his coat.
Stabilizing a mortally wounded target requires 
an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check. The creditor 
is an NPC, and the GM decides that they have no 
particular talent at first aid, so the GM rolls a flat 2d6 
for them and gets a lucky 10. That’s just enough to 
stabilize Bort even without the help of proper med-
ical supplies, and so the downed victor is carried off 
to a an unlicensed street doc for emergency patching.
After a month of recovery, a cocky Bort has 
equipped himself with a spiked walking stick, a me-
dium primitive weapon that is “more bashy” than his 
small knife. He spots the young PC Warrior gun -
slinger Eliza Darrick in the grimy hive street and 
covets her fine revolver. What better way to acquire 
it than to cosh the young woman?
He sidles into position near her before raising 
his stick. Eliza has a considerable fund of common 
sense and is not subject to surprise at this turn of 
events, given the environment. Both roll initiative 
and Bort wins. He makes his roll of 1d20+1, no lon-
ger rushed by a Snap Attack, and gets a 13.
Eliza has an armored undersuit that grants her 
an AC of 13, plus a bonus of +1 for her Dexterity 
modifier, for a total AC of 14. As Bort’s roll is lower, 
he misses. Because medium primitive weapons only 
do Shock to targets with AC of 13 or less, Bort’s stick 
doesn’t even do Shock damage to her.
Eliza then draws the Readied revolver that Bort 
so coveted and makes her own attack roll of 1d20, +1 
for her attack bonus, +1 more for her Dexterity, and 
+1 more for her Shoot-1 skill. She rolls a total of 4, 
an abysmal showing. As she does not much care for 
being jumped by the likes of Bort, she chooses to use 
her Warrior class ability to turn a missed shot into a 
hit once per scene, sealing Bort’s doom.
With only 1 hit point, it doesn’t even matter 
what Eliza might roll for damage. The GM describes 
the look of dull surprise on Bort’s face as Eliza’s bullet 
plows a wet hole through his chest.
Eliza ducks down a side street as Bort falls to the 
filthy asphalt. Even if the GM decided that Bort had 
a chance to survive his wound, none of the denizens 
around him have any interest in anything but the 
contents of his pockets. Bort gurgles out the last of 
his life six rounds later, giving fodder for bad dreams 
to the scarred urchin who is tugging the stick from 
his slackening grip.
Combat •51 
Pick up an Item Move Action
The combatant can scoop an object off the floor if they 
have a free hand, leaving it Readied in their grip.
Stand Up Move Action
The combatant gets up from a prone position. Most 
characters that have just been revived from uncon -
sciousness must get up before they do much else.
Go Prone On Turn Action
The combatant falls flat, forcing distant ranged attack-
ers to take a -2 penalty to hit them. Adjacent enemies 
find you an easier target, however, gaining +2 to hit.
Hold An Action Move Action
By choosing to Hold An Action, the combatant can delay 
taking the rest of their actions until later in the round, 
activating them as an Instant action. Thus, a hero who 
wins initiative might use their Move action to Hold An 
Action. Later in the round, as an enemy rushes around 
a corner, he may Instantly elect to use his Main Action 
to Make A Ranged Attack with his readied laser rifle. If 
acting in response to someone else’s impending action, 
the held action is resolved first.
===== PAGE 56 =====
52• Combat
CombaT ComPlICaTIons and maneuVers
Players generally seek to wring out every possible ad-
vantage in a combat, and that means they’ll often try 
unusual maneuvers or add special complications to a 
fight. The situations that follow are just some of the 
more common circumstances a GM will encounter.
Forcing Enemy Movement
Sometimes the PC will want to shove an enemy into 
a firepit, force a foe into an open reactor core spark, 
dump an alien chamberpot on their head, or swing 
from the balcony down upon an evildoer. Sometimes 
these gambits will simply work, while other times a 
skill check might be required.
To shove, herd, or otherwise manipulate a foe, the 
attacker has to hit them with a Punch attack, doing 
no damage, and then win an opposed Punch or Exert 
skill check. If they win, the opponent gets moved up 
to three meters in the direction the PC wishes or is 
knocked prone. Herding a foe with a melee weapon 
may also be possible at the GM’s discretion, allowing a 
Stab skill check instead of Punch.
When environmental damage is needed for a fire-
pit, dropped object, or inconvenient wall spike, 1d8 is 
usually a good choice, with potential ongoing damage 
if the victim doesn’t get out. Major foes can handle a 
lot of such accidents, while ordinary men and women 
might well be taken out of the fight by them.
Disarming a Foe
Wresting a weapon from a hostile wielder is a difficult 
feat under the best of circumstances. Still, sometimes 
a PC will want to strip their foe of something sharp 
or shooty.
Normally it is only possible to disarm a foe when 
engaging them in melee combat. Shooting the weapon 
out of an enemy’s hand is a popular holovid trope, but it 
tends to be less practical on the actual battlefield.
To execute a disarm, the assailant must choose to 
spend their Main Action doing so and make a successful 
attack roll. If they hit, they do no damage; instead, both 
they and their targets make Dex or Strength-modified 
skill checks with the weapons they’re using, with the 
defender gaining a +3 bonus on the roll. If the attacker 
wins the opposed check, the enemy is disarmed. On a 
tie, both are disarmed.
Disarmed weapons skitter 1d4 meters away in a 
random direction. If the attacker beats the defender by 
at least three points on the opposed check, they end 
up in control of the weapon if they have a free hand.
Thus, if a bare-handed assailant tried to rip the gun 
out of the hands of an enemy alien, the assailant would 
need to hit with a Punch attack and then roll either Str/
Punch or Dex/Punch against the alien’s skill check + 3. 
If they won, they’d send the gun flying, and if they won 
by 3 or more points, they’d end up holding it.
Execution Attacks
Occasionally an assailant will have the chance to per -
fectly set up a shot against an entirely unsuspecting tar-
get. Such surprise attacks can be devastatingly effective, 
and are capable of summarily executing almost anyone.
Setting up a killing blow this way requires a full 
minute of preparation, whether as a sniper drawing 
a bead on a target or an assassin drifting closer to an 
unsuspecting politico. Any focused attention on the 
assailant will spoil this preparation, as will any action 
that alarms the target. Assassins intending a melee at-
tack must be using an adequately lethal weapon, such as 
a knife rather than a fist or bludgeon. PCs with special 
talents in unarmed combat or murderous blunt weapon 
use might be exempt from this at the GM’s discretion.
Once the preparation is complete, a sniper may 
shoot or an assassin may attack an adjacent target. The 
target’s Armor Class is irrelevant, assuming the weap-
on being used isn’t too primitive to penetrate high-tech 
armor. Hitting with a sniper shot is a Dex/Shoot skill 
check, with a difficulty of 6 for a point-blank shot, 8 for 
one at the weapon’s normal range, and 10 for a shot at 
extreme range. A melee attack always hits, but the as-
sassin must be adjacent to the target, and cannot move 
to close on the same round. They must be adjacent and 
unsuspected at the start of the round.
If the attack hits, it does maximum damage and 
the victim must immediately make a Physical saving 
throw at a penalty equal to the attacker’s combat skill 
or they will be mortally wounded on the spot. Some 
victims might merely be incapacitated instead if such 
an outcome was intended and plausible.
Attacking a completely helpless adjacent opponent, 
such as one who is unconscious, asleep, thoroughly 
bound, or otherwise incapable of self-defense does not 
require a hit roll and will leave them mortally wounded.
Player characters are as vulnerable to these rules as 
NPCs are, and may be sniped or stabbed if they behave 
in sufficiently incautious fashion.
Two-Weapon Fighting
Some players enjoy having their heroes employ two 
weapons at once in combat, whether they’re a pair of 
knives, a brace of laser pistols, or some other plausible 
pairing of weapons.
Dual-wielding requires at least level-1 skill in 
Shoot or Stab depending on the weapons used. Novices 
cannot effectively dual-wield.
A hero who dual-wields suffers a -1 penalty on 
hit rolls due to the extra complication, but gains a +2 
bonus on damage rolls on a successful hit. This bonus 
doesn’t add to Shock. Only one weapon can be used to 
attack in any given round, though either can be used.
Unarmed combatants cannot dual-wield.
===== PAGE 57 =====
Desperate Measures
Eliza Darrick is in a bad situation. During the ex -
ploration of a lost Mandate research station, an ally 
managed to accidentally activate the installation’s 
defense systems. A swarm of decaying security bots 
almost overwhelmed the group, and a chance shot 
from an integral mag rifle has just dropped Eliza.
The gunslinger is on the floor with zero hit 
points. If she were an NPC, the shot probably would 
have just killed her outright, but as a PC, she has 
the hardihood to keep struggling against any wound 
a human could theoretically survive. Even so, she’s 
going to die in six rounds if nobody comes to her aid.
Big John, an ally of the downed shootist, spends 
his Main Action dragging her behind cover as the 
rest of the party tries to hold back the metal tide. By 
the time he actually gets the chance to try to stabilize 
her, a full round has passed since she was felled.
Luckily, Big John has a lazarus patch Readied at 
his belt. Unluckily, he has no medical skill whatsoev-
er, though he’s quite intelligent, with a +1 attribute 
modifier. He rolls 2d6, -1 for his lack of Heal skill, +1 
for his Intelligence modifier, for a total of 6.
Unfortunately, since Eliza has been bleeding out 
for one full round, the difficulty of stabilizing her is 
7. The patch fails. Big John has another one in his 
pack, but it’s going to take him his next round’s Main 
Action to dig it out and then another round to try to 
apply it, by which time Eliza will have been bleeding 
for three rounds and the difficulty will be 9.
The next round, a shout from across the room 
alerts Big John that an ally is throwing him some -
thing. A stim unit comes skittering across the floor, 
and Big John uses a Move action to scoop it up, leav-
ing it Readied in his grip. It’s an ancient Mandate cos-
metic stim they looted from the station’s commissary, 
and it might just save Eliza’s life.
Big John presses the stim capsule against Eliza’s 
neck and the mysterious pretech nanites do their 
work, giving her minty-fresh breath for the next six 
months. As a side effect, the medical substrate of the 
Mandate stim also heals 1d6 damage to her, raising 
her to five hit points. Eliza is now prone but fully 
revived. Thanks to the advanced healing, she does 
not need further rest before returning to action.
injury, death, and healing •53 
Injury, deaTh, and healIng
A creature brought to zero hit points has been defeated 
and can no longer fight. If brought to zero hit points by 
a lethal weapon, they are dead or dying. Foes brought 
down with fists, blunt objects, or other less-than-lethal 
means may merely be unconscious or incapacitated, if 
their assailant wasn’t trying to kill them. Some enemies 
might even be incapacitated by purely mental or emo-
tional strain. Foes defeated non-lethally recover one 
hit point after ten minutes and then function normally.
A mortally-wounded creature at zero hit points 
will die in no more than six rounds. They may be un-
conscious, screaming for their mother, trying to press 
vital organs back into place, or begging for mercy, but 
they can perform no useful action and their fate is sealed 
if no immediate aid is provided. Creatures dropped by 
Heavy weapons, explosives, or other dramatic injury 
may be instantly killed at the GM’s discretion. Addi -
tional damage inflicted on a mortally-wounded target 
will always kill them immediately.
A PC who wants to extend mercy to an enemy or 
aid to a friend can use their Main Action to attempt 
an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check, using whatever 
modifier is best. If they have no special medical tools 
available at all, the difficulty of the check is 10 plus 
the number of rounds that have passed since the target 
went down. If they have a medical kit or other proper 
trauma tools, the difficulty is 8 plus the rounds since 
injury, and if they expend a Lazarus patch on the target, 
the difficulty is 6 plus the time. A failed check can be 
re-attempted next round if the target isn’t dead yet, but 
Lazarus patches are expended even on a failure. The 
Biopsionic technique Psychic Succor automatically suc -
ceeds in stabilizing a target, if any time remains to them.
A critically-injured target who has been stabilized 
regains one hit point after ten minutes of recovery. 
They are able to move and function normally if they are 
fiercely determined to do so, but any further damage 
whatsoever will kill them, with no chance for stabili -
zation. If they are healed with some high-tech pharma-
ceutical stim or advanced Biopsionic technique, they 
can shake off this fragility and return to action with 
whatever hit points the drug or power have provided. 
Without such advanced healing, a critically-wounded 
target requires at least a week of bed rest and medical 
care before they can shake off their fragility and start 
regaining their level in hit points after each night’s rest.
This assumes that TL4 medical care is available. If 
only TL3 tech is on hand, the recovery time is a month. 
If TL2 or lower medical care is provided, the recovery 
time is a month, and the target must make a Physical 
saving throw at the end of it, with a bonus equal to the 
Heal skill of whoever is tending them. On a success, 
they’ll recover within 1d4 more weeks. On a failure, 
the primitive technology ensures they’ll die of their 
wounds at some point in that time.
Creatures that have suffered damage but have not 
been mortally injured regain hit points equal to their 
hit dice or character level after each night of good rest.
===== PAGE 58 =====
54• haCking
haCkIng
In the far future, it’s inevitable that many advanced civ-
ilizations will use computers to control their vehicles, 
infrastructure, and data stores. It is equally inevitable 
that some tech-talented hero will try to use that fact 
to get something they want. While hacking has some 
significant limitations in what it can accomplish, it can 
still be a useful tool for the right kind of hero.
The Digital Environment
Most planets with TL4 or better will rely on computers 
to operate their infrastructure and maintain their data. 
They may or may not have an internet-like global net-
work depending on their political situation and cultural 
values, but individual buildings or data storehouses will 
normally have an internal network. If there is no open 
planetary internet, a hacker will need to be physically 
present in the networked area to hack the system.
Most hacking requires a physical interface with 
the system, either through tapping a data line with a 
metatool or plugging into a connected terminal. Tap-
ping a data line usually takes at least a minute unless a 
special cable-siphon tool is used, while plugging into 
a terminal is a Main Action. Some buildings may have 
a local wireless network that can be used as an entry 
point, and some planetary internets may allow assaults 
on arbitrary computers, but such convenient situations 
are unusual. Advanced security software usually makes 
such remote assaults impractically difficult.
It’s up to the GM to decide what parts of a facility 
are susceptible to hacking, and to determine the full 
scope of what effects a hacker can produce. A high-
tech security door in some advanced facility might well 
be hackable, but every refrigerator, locked closet door, 
and employee bathroom is not necessarily slaved to the 
local network.
Executing the Hack
Assuming a hacker is able to make a connection, they 
can make an Int/Program skill check to hack the system. 
If they’ve spent at least an hour planning this specific 
hack, the skill check requires only a Main Action to 
execute their prepared code. If they’re performing the 
hack off-the-cuff, it takes ten minutes. If they’re rushed 
and don’t have time to either prepare the hack or spend 
ten minutes dueling with security systems, they can 
speed it up into a single Main Action at an additional 
difficulty penalty.
The difficulty of the roll depends on the kind of 
information or influence they want to get out of the 
system, adjusted by the quality of the security system 
and any rush on the hacker’s part. On a success, they 
get what they want. If what they want is data, the in-
formation is downloaded instantly. If what they want 
is control over an automated system such as a factory 
control computer or a security system, they maintain 
control for 1d4 rounds plus their Program skill before 
the system detects the intrusion and locks them out. 
The hacker can attempt to regain control, but further 
hacking attempts become more difficult.
If they fail, they must immediately make a second 
skill check at the same difficulty. On a success, they 
avoid an immediate alarm and a trace of their hacking 
location. On a failure, the system has been alerted to 
their intrusion attempt and has informed its human 
overseers of the hacker’s location. Depending on the 
nature of the system being hacked, the response may 
range from an annoyed data janitor shutting down the 
compromised terminal after he’s done eating lunch to 
a fast-response special weapons team busting through 
the windows ninety seconds later.
Hacking the same system in a short period of time 
is progressively more difficult, as the system’s alerts and 
security measures are increasingly active. Whether or 
not prior attempts were successful, an additional +1 
difficulty penalty is added for every hack attempted in 
the system after the first within 24 hours.
Line Shunts
Some well-guarded or high-security computer systems 
require more than a simple hack to obtain data or sub-
vert their functionality. These systems have multiple 
security redundancies and consensus-based backup 
processors that make it all but impossible to execute a 
hack from a single point. To overcome these systems 
or to execute exceptionally long-lived hacks, the hacker 
must place one or more line shunts at other locations.
A line shunt is a TL4 piece of black-market tech 
designed to tap into a data line and spoof the contents 
in concert with a hacking attempt.
Professional, well-maintained computer systems 
usually require one line shunt to be applied before any 
hack can be performed. Government or infotech-fo -
cused corporation buildings usually need two. Black 
sites or extremely well-guarded systems need three.
Once a sufficient number of line shunts are ap -
plied, any ensuing hacks last until the shunts are dis -
turbed. Thus, if a hacker placed the shunts and then 
Subverted a System, their control would last as long as 
the shunts remained in place. The likelihood of a shunt 
being found will depend on how accessible the location 
is, how active the guardians are, and how obvious the 
hacking attempt is.
Line shunts must usually be placed at specific loca-
tions in a structure or building in order to tap the right 
lines, depending on the goal of the hacker. If the hacker 
doesn’t have a map of the site’s network architecture, 
they can find the necessary sites with the Answer a Spe-
cific Question hack. This basic data probe doesn’t require 
a line shunt, even if other hacks on the system would 
need them to be placed.
===== PAGE 59 =====
haCking •55 
Data Protocols
It’s assumed that a competent PC with the Program 
skill is familiar with the common data formats and 
computing systems of their home sector. They will be 
aware of the security measures and technical specifica-
tions of worlds that are in common contact with each 
other. Sometimes, however, the hacker is faced with a 
completely foreign system, or one built along unknown 
alien lines. In these cases they will need to have the 
data protocols for the system before they can make an 
effective hacking attempt.
Assuming the protocols aren’t restricted informa-
tion, the hacker can drop a few credits on local tech 
manuals and practice for a month minus one week per 
level of Program skill, down to a one-day minimum. 
At the end of that period, they’ll master the protocols.
If manuals aren’t widely available, one option is to 
find a local hacker willing to share their information. 
The difficulty of this is up to the GM; it might require 
nothing more than a Connect skill check, or it may re-
quire a full-fledged adventure to find someone willing 
to stick their neck out for foreigners who are clearly 
going to cause trouble with their newfound knowledge. 
Prices range from 1,000 credits for worlds with restrict-
ed but not carefully-policed data, to prices of 10,000 
and up for worlds with more draconian data controls.
Another option is to obtain a well-secured local 
computer and simply experiment on it. Of course, lo-
cal hardware with up-to-date security measures of a 
breadth and sophistication sufficient to teach a hacker 
is likely to be either very expensive on the black market 
or require a “collection expedition” by the party.
Example Hacking Actions
These are some of the usual actions taken by a hacker. 
A GM can extrapolate others as the situation requires.
Answer a Specific Question (Difficulty 8): Get a specific 
fact or piece of information from the system. Find 
a person’s home address, find a path to a desired 
destination in a building, locate active security 
cameras, pull criminal records on a person, or 
some other direct query. 
Get General Information (Difficulty 10): Pull all avail-
able information on a particular topic from the 
system. Get a full map of a site, get all information 
about security systems, pull a subject’s complete 
personnel file from a corporate database, acquire 
all files related to a secret project, or some other 
exhaustive data dump on a single specific topic.
Complete Database Acquisition (Difficulty 12): Copy 
an entire database to another computer or data 
storage unit. A single database might be a cor -
poration’s personnel records, the records of a 
particular police precinct, the full database of a 
complex technical project, a starship’s operations 
record and system log, or another entire corpus of 
data. The database must be entirely present in the 
local system and any significant database requires 
at least an hour to decrypt and download, thus 
necessitating the use of at least one line shunt. The 
hacker must either have an adequate data storage 
unit, a landline connection to another computer 
or a wireless connection to a remote server. 
Suppress a System (Difficulty 8): Shut down a particu -
lar automated system connected to this network. 
Cameras stop recording, sensors stop sensing, 
open powered doors won’t close, and automated 
gun turrets won’t fire. The hacker can affect sev-
eral individual sensors or systems, but only of the 
same type. Thus, they could shut down an electri-
fied fence for the duration of the hack, but they’d 
have to make a second hack to deactivate the cam-
eras. When the hack ends, the system will resume 
operation without registering the interruption.
Subvert a System (Difficulty 10): Much as suppressing 
a system, except that the hacker can control its 
operation within the device’s normal parameters. 
They can upload fake input to a sensor system, fire 
automated defenses, or open sealed vault doors. 
The hacker can control the system each round by 
using a Main Action to do so; if uncontrolled, the 
system simply repeats or maintains its last state.
Sabotage a System (Difficulty 10): The hacker complete-
ly fries a specific system, either causing it to phys-
ically self-destruct or jamming it with malignant 
code. Unlike most hacks performed without link 
shunts, this damage is permanent until the owners 
repair the broken hardware, a process that usually 
requires several hours. Sabotage always triggers 
immediate alerts to any human overseers.
Common Hacking Actions Difficulty
Answer a Specific Question 8
Get General Information 10
Complete Database Acquisition 12
Suppress a System 8
Subvert a System 10
Sabotage a System 10
Hacking Circumstances Modifier
Human overseers are alarmed +1
Rushed work for an unplanned hack +2
Each hack after the first per 24 hours +1
Especially sensitive system +1
Types of Systems Modifier
Ordinary personal system -1
Small business system/savvy personal +0
Minor gov/major corporation +1
Major government/megacorp +2
===== PAGE 60 =====
56• advanCement
CharaCTer adVanCemenT
When characters accumulate enough experience points, 
they advance a character level. New PCs start out at lev-
el one and the most experienced, capable heroes in the 
sector might reach level ten. Advancing beyond level 
ten is usually prohibitively difficult, though possible at 
the GM’s discretion.
Gaining Experience Points
To advance in capability, PCs need to earn experience 
points. Once they accumulate enough experience, they 
can advance to the next character level, representing 
the sharpening of their skills and the heroic veterancy 
that comes of surviving perils and dire challenges.
There are many different things that can earn a 
hero experience points, and the kind of activities and 
goals that reward them will vary with the kind of cam-
paign you’re playing. The GM should make clear to the 
whole group what kind of things earn the PCs experi-
ence in their game.
For some games, success might lie in plundering 
alien hoards or clawing wealth from the hands of des-
perate patrons. Other games might reward the PCs 
for achieving personal goals, whether or not there 
was any money in it. Some might even award XP only 
for spending credits, requiring every PC to recklessly 
waste their wealth before gaining a level. It’s up to the 
GM to pick a method that fits the group’s tastes.
The table below indicates how many experience 
points need to be earned before a PC can advance to 
that level. Once the requisite number of XP are earned, 
the hero gains their new level and all the benefits.
Note that this table makes for a relatively fast 
progression through the early levels of an adventur -
er’s career, before slowing drastically at higher levels. 
A group that prefers a different pacing might alter the 
chart to suit their own tastes.
In general, you can assume that one “successful” 
gaming session should usually earn you about 3 XP.
Benefits of Gaining a Level
Once a PC has been awarded enough experience points 
to reach the next level, they immediately gain the ben-
efits of advancement. No special training or practice 
is required as their abilities are assumed to have been 
honed by their past adventures.
Roll Additional Hit Points
First, they become harder to overcome in combat. To 
determine their new maximum hit points, they roll a 
number of six-sided dice equal to their new level, add-
ing their Constitution modifier to each one. A nega -
tive modifier can’t lower a die’s result below 1. If the 
total is greater than their current hit points, they take 
this new total. Otherwise, their current maximum hit 
points increase by one.
Thus, if a character with a Constitution score of 
14 and four hit points reached second level, they’d roll 
2d6+2. If the total was five or greater, they’d keep it. 
If they managed to roll snake eyes and get only a four, 
they’d still increase their maximum hit points to five. 
Warriors and Adventurers with the Partial War-
rior class option get a further two hit points each time 
they advance a level. Thus, a third level Warrior would 
roll 3d6+6 for their hit point total, plus three times 
their Constitution modifier.
Improve Attack Bonus
A PC’s base attack bonus becomes equal to half their 
new character level, rounded down. Warriors may 
instead use their full character level for the bonus. Ad-
venturers with the Partial Warrior class option may 
add a cumulative +1 to their attack bonus at levels one 
and five, thus having a total +1 attack bonus at level 
one and +4 at level five.
Improve Saving Throws
The PC becomes more capable of evading chance 
harms and perils. Their saving throw scores decrease 
by one, making it easier to succeed on saving throws 
by rolling equal or over it. As a first level character has 
saving throw scores of 15, reaching second level would 
lower them to 14, modified by attributes.
Character Level Total Experience Required
1 0
2 3
3 6
4 12
5 18
6 27
7 39
8 54
9 72
10 93
11+ +24 points for each level more
===== PAGE 61 =====
advanCement •57 
Gain and Spend Skill Points
They become more capable with their skills. A PC gains 
three skill points they can spend on improving their 
skills or save to spend later. Experts and Adventurers 
with the Partial Expert class option gain an extra bonus 
point to spend on a non-combat, non-psychic skill.
If the PC is a Psychic or Partial Psychic, they must 
spend at least one of these points on improving psychic 
skills or gaining new psychic techniques. They can save 
these points to spend later if they wish, but they cannot 
spend them on more mundane talents. Restricted psy-
chics can only ever improve or learn techniques from 
the psychic discipline they selected when they picked 
the Psychic primary focus. Unrestricted psychics can 
improve or learn any discipline. PCs with the Psychic 
character class are all unrestricted, while Partial Psychic 
Adventurers are restricted in their talents.
Skills that are gained or improved immediately on 
gaining a level are assumed to have been perfected over 
the past level and require no training time or teaching. 
If you save your skill points to spend them later then 
you’ll need to find some teacher or other explanation 
for developing them. It doesn’t take more than a week 
to refine your new ability, but you can’t usually spend 
your points mid-scene to develop a heretofore-unmen-
tioned expertise with flamethrowers.
The cost for improving a skill is listed below. Ev-
ery skill level must be purchased in order; to gain lev-
el-1 in a skill you need to pay one point for level-0 and 
then two points for level-1. A PC must be the requi -
site minimum level to increase a skill to certain levels. 
Less hardened heroes simply don’t have the focus and 
real-life experience to attain such a pitch of mastery.
A PC cannot develop skills beyond level-4.
Psychic Effort and Techniques
When a Psychic gains a new level in a psychic skill, they 
can immediately pick a technique from that discipline 
of equal or lesser level. They can’t save this pick; they 
must choose it as soon as they gain the new skill level.
Psychics can also spend their skill points to master 
additional psychic techniques. The cost of this educa-
tion is equal to the technique’s minimum skill level re-
quirement. Thus, to master the Biopsionic technique 
Metamorph would cost three skill points, because Meta-
morph requires Biopsionics-3 skill to learn. 
A Psychic’s maximum Effort is equal to 1 plus their 
highest psychic skill, plus the best of their Wisdom or 
Constitution modifiers.
Purchase Improved Attributes
A veteran adventurer may have trained or honed their 
natural abilities well enough to improve one of their 
six base attributes. While even the most determined 
development isn’t enough to turn complete ineptitude 
into gifted competence, a hard-working adventurer can 
hone their existing strengths considerably.
The first time a PC improves an attribute, it costs 
1 skill point and adds +1 to an attribute of their choice. 
The second improvement to their attributes costs 2 
skill points, the third 3, and so forth. Each improve -
ment adds +1 to the attribute, potentially improving 
its modifier.
PCs must be a certain level before purchasing the 
third, fourth, or fifth attribute boost. No more than five 
attribute boosts can ever be purchased by a PC.
Choose New Foci
Finally, the PC might be eligible to pick an additional 
level in a focus. At levels 2, 5, 7, and 10 a PC can add 
a level to an existing focus or pick up the first level in 
a new focus.
If this is the first level they’ve taken in the focus, 
they might be granted a skill as a free bonus pick, de-
pending on the focus’ benefits. During character cre -
ation, this bonus skill pick is treated like any other skill 
pick. If the focus is taken as part of advancement, how-
ever, it instead counts as three skill points spent toward 
increasing the skill. This is enough to raise a nonexis-
tent skill to level-1, or boost a level-1 skill to level-2. 
They may do this even if they aren’t high-enough level 
to normally qualify for a skill level that high.
If the skill points aren’t quite enough to raise the 
skill to a new level, they remain as credit toward future 
advances. If applied to a skill that is already at level-4, 
the PC can spend the three skill points on any other 
skill of their choice.
New Skill
Level
Skill Point
Cost
Minimum
Character Level
0 1 1
1 2 1
2 3 3
3 4 6
4 5 9
Attribute
Boost
Skill Point
Cost
Minimum
Character Level
First 1 1
Second 2 1
Third 3 3
Fourth 4 6
Final 5 9
===== PAGE 62 =====
58• environmental hazardS
enVIronmenTal hazards
Falling
PCs who plunge off elevated surfaces suffer 1d6 damage 
for every three full meters fallen under standard-gravi-
ty conditions.
Poisons
Those afflicted with some insidious venom can usually 
make a Physical saving throw to resist the worst of the 
effects. Natural venoms usually require 1d6 rounds to 
apply their effect, while special or engineered toxins 
take effect instantly. Poison effects may include uncon-
sciousness, hit point damage, hallucinations, or death.
Even in the latter case, however, swift application 
of the appropriate Biopsionic techniques or success at 
an Int/Heal check can negate the effect of the poison. 
The difficulty for this check varies with the potency of 
the poison and assumes that the PC medic has access 
to a TL4 medkit. Most natural poisons are difficulty 
8, while synthetic toxins are difficulty 10 or greater. 
Only one attempt can be made to neutralize a poison. 
Use of a specific antivenin is always successful if such 
a resource is available.
Drugged or damaged PCs are instantly restored by 
successful treatment. Those who have been killed by a 
poison revive with one hit point as if recovering from a 
mortal wound, assuming the antidote is applied within 
six rounds of the victim’s succumbing.
Diseases
Hideous interstellar plagues are an occupational hazard 
of adventurers, though exposure to a pathogen usually 
permits a Physical saving throw to resist its effects. If 
failed, the PC is infected, and will suffer progressive -
ly-worse symptoms until the disease runs its course or 
the PC dies.
Most sicknesses will simply apply penalties to 
skill checks or hit rolls, or reduce a PC’s maximum hit 
points, or otherwise debilitate the character. A few may 
require one or more additional saving throws to be 
made at specific intervals in order to avoid eventual 
death, or be a certain doom to those unlucky enough 
to be afflicted with it.
As with poisons, Biopsionic techniques or Int/Heal 
medical attention can cure a sickness. Assuming TL4 
medical supplies, ordinary diseases are usually difficulty 
8, while more virulent strains are difficulty 10 or more. 
One attempt can be made to cure a disease per week, 
and success usually clears up any symptoms rapidly.
Radiation
Radiation is a slow killer in small doses, and a quick end 
in larger ones. Targets exposed to dangerous amounts 
of radiation must make a Physical saving throw at in-
tervals depending on the strength of the glow. Mildly 
dangerous zones might force a save once per day or 
once per hour, up to lethal rad zones that force mul -
tiple saves per round. Vacc suits and other forms of 
protection can effectively shield a wearer from weaker 
sources of radiation.
Each failed saving throw lowers the target’s Con-
stitution score by one point. If the new score decreas -
es a hero’s Constitution modifier, they lose any excess 
maximum hit points their former modifier granted. 
Characters reduced below half their original Consti -
tution score will die in 1d6 weeks from radiation poi-
soning; those reduced below a Constitution score of 3 
will die instantly. Radiation poisoning that does not 
immediately kill a victim can induce vomiting, head -
aches, soft tissue bleeding and dizziness, but a resolute 
victim can continue functioning more-or-less normally 
until death. A target killed by radiation poisoning can-
not be revived by Psychic Succor  or other stabilization 
techniques.
Someone who has suffered a fatal dose of radiation 
poisoning can only be saved by treatment at a TL4 hos-
pital or ship’s sick bay, recovering the lost Constitution 
at a rate of one point per week. Non-fatal doses can 
be treated by a TL4 medkit and an Int/Heal check at 
difficulty 10. Each success restores one lost point of 
Constitution and a check can be made once per day.
Hard Vacuum
PCs sometimes encounter the icy void of space more 
intimately than they would prefer. Actual death from 
vacuum exposure may take a little while, but incapaci -
tation is rapid for most victims. A PC exposed to hard 
vacuum may continue acting normally for a number of 
rounds equal to one plus their Constitution modifier. 
Each round thereafter, they suffer 1d20 damage and 
must make a Physical save to keep conscious, assuming 
the damage hasn’t felled them.
===== PAGE 63 =====
sysTem quICk referenCe sheeT
Skill Checks
Roll 2d6 and add the character’s most relevant attribute modi-
fier and skill. Sometimes more than one skill might apply; the 
PC can choose which to roll. If the roll is equal or higher than 
the check difficulty, the PC succeeds. If less, then they either fail 
outright, attain only partial success, or suffer an unanticipated 
turn of events at the GM’s discretion.
For opposed skill checks, both participants roll and the 
higher roll wins. For NPCs, assume they have a +0 bonus unless 
the activity is one they’d reasonably be good at. In that case, they 
can apply their listed skill bonus to the check.
Saving Throws
To make a saving throw, a victim  rolls 1d20 and tries to equal 
or exceed their relevant saving throw score. Target Physical 
saves for poisons, diseases, and exhaustion, Evasion saves for 
diving for cover or leaping back from peril, and Mental saves 
for resisting psychic powers. NPCs have a saving throw score 
of 15 minus half their hit dice, rounded down.
Injury and Healing
A target reduced to zero hit points by a lethal attack is mortally 
wounded. One dropped by non-lethal assaults is unconscious. 
Dying victims can take no actions and will die soon with -
out help. Allies can attempt an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check 
as a Main Action to stabilize the victim. With no medical tools, 
the difficulty is 10 plus the rounds since they went down. With 
a medkit, it’s difficulty 8 plus the time, and using a Lazarus patch 
makes it difficulty 6 plus the time. Failed checks can be attempt-
ed again, but a victim will die after the sixth round.
Stabilized characters regain 1 hit point after ten minutes 
and can act normally, but any further damage kills them instant-
ly. This fragility ends after they regain more hit points, either 
through rest, stims, or biopsionic healing.
Stabilized PCs take at least a week to start recovering hit 
points normally. Those who have merely been hurt but not 
mortally wounded regain their level in lost hit points after every 
night’s peaceful rest.
The Combat Sequence
Combat is divided into rounds of six seconds. Every participant 
gets a turn, and then the sequence starts over again.
First, every participant rolls initiative, rolling 1d8 plus 
their Dexterity modifier, if they have one. Participants act in 
order, highest to lowest, with PCs winning ties with NPCs.
On their turn, a combatant can take one Main Action, one 
Move, and as many On Turn actions as is plausible. A combat-
ant can take Instant actions at any time, even when it’s not their 
turn, or even if dice have already been rolled.
Acting In Combat
You can use a Main Action to attack an enemy, disengage from 
a melee, use a skill, reload a gun, produce a Stowed item, take a 
second Move action, or do anything else you could accomplish 
in six seconds.
You can use a Move action to stand up from prone, club 
up a ranged weapon, or move 10 meters. Your movement is 
half that if you’re climbing, swimming, or otherwise navigating 
rough terrain. You can’t split a Move action around your Main 
Action. You have to move all at once. If you move away from a 
melee combatant without spending a Main Action to disengage 
from the fray, all adjacent melee attackers get a free attack at you.
You can use an On Turn action to fall prone, say something, 
drop an object, or do anything else that’s very simple to do and 
takes almost no time or attention.
You can use an Instant action at any time to trigger certain 
special powers. You can also use it to make a Snap Attack with 
a weapon or go totally defensive, though both of the latter will 
cost you your Main Action for the round, and can’t be done if 
you’ve already used your Main Action.
Hitting in Combat
To hit a target, the attacker rolls 1d20 and adds their attack 
bonus, the relevant combat skill, and the attribute modifier 
relevant to their weapon. Weapons with more than one listed 
attribute allow the PC to use either. If the PC lacks the relevant 
combat skill entirely, they take a -2 penalty to hit. If the roll is 
equal or greater than the target’s Armor Class, the attack is a hit.
On a hit, the attacker rolls the weapon’s damage and adds 
their relevant attribute modifier. The target takes that many 
hit points of damage.
On a miss, a weapon that inflicts Shock damage might still 
hurt the target. If the weapon’s Shock can harm the target’s 
Armor Class, the target takes the weapon’s Shock damage even 
on a miss. This damage is increased by the wielder’s relevant 
attribute modifier and any other damage bonuses. A weapon 
never does less damage than its Shock would do on a miss.
Morale in Combat
To make a morale check, NPCs roll 2d6. If equal or less than 
their morale score, they keep fighting. Otherwise, they flee, 
withdraw, or surrender. NPCs check morale after their first 
casualty and after half are down. PCs never check morale.
Skill Check Difficulties
6 A relatively simple task that is still more than the PC 
would usually be expected to manage in their regular 
background. Anything easier than this isn’t worth a 
skill check.
8 A significant challenge to a competent professional 
that they’d still succeed at more often than not.
10 Something too difficult to be expected of anyone but 
a skilled expert, and even they might fail.
12 Only a true master could expect to carry this off with 
any degree of reliability.
14+ Only a true master has any chance of achieving this at 
all, and even they will probably fail.
===== PAGE 64 =====

===== PAGE 65 =====
EQUIPMENT AND VEHICLES
Every aspiring stellar adventurer needs the essential 
equipment of his trade. For some, it might consist of 
appropriate toolkits and medical supplies, while oth -
ers prefer to spend the greater part of their funds on 
heavy weaponry. Prices may vary, but certain needs 
are eternal.
The following tables provide general guidelines 
on the kind of equipment that might be available on a 
reasonably sophisticated world. Prices can vary drasti -
cally depending on the supply of a particular good. A 
remote frontier outpost might have plenty of firearms 
to hand, but a good guitar might go for ten times the 
common rate. Players and GMs should treat the prices 
listed as rough guidelines.
Encumbrance
Characters might want to carry an armory on their 
backs and the contents of a general store in their pock-
ets, but this is rarely a practical ambition. Characters 
can only carry so many things, and carrying a great deal 
can slow them down substantially.
A character can have Readied a number of items 
equal to half their Strength score, rounded down. 
Ready items include those that the character is using 
or wearing at all times, or that they have conveniently 
to hand in sheaths, holsters, or belt pouches. Suits of 
armor count as Readied items, but the normal clothing 
and jewelry that a character might wear does not. A 
character can draw or produce a Readied item as part 
of any action they may take during a turn.
A character may have a number of Stowed items 
equal to their full Strength score. Stowed items are 
carried in backpacks, in carefully-balanced leg or arm 
pockets, or otherwise packed away where they will least 
encumber the character. If a character needs to get out 
a Stowed item in a hurry, they must use their Main 
Action to dig it out of their pack or pockets.
Very small items carried in small numbers do not 
count against encumbrance limits. Other small items 
can be packed together into bundles to simplify their 
carriage, though getting at them then takes an addition-
al round of fumbling with the packaging. Exactly how 
many of a given small item can be packed into a single 
item bundle is up to the GM, though as a rule of thumb 
six Type A energy cells or three magazines of bullets 
can be bound into one packed item. Extremely bulky 
or unwieldy objects might count as multiple items at 
the GM’s discretion.
Characters can burden themselves with more gear 
if they’re willing to sacrifice some fleetness of foot to 
do so. Up to two additional items can be carried Ready 
or four additional ones Stowed at the cost of becom -
ing Lightly Encumbered, and having their base move -
ment slowed from 10 meters per round to 7 meters 
per round. A further two items can be carried Ready 
or four Stowed at the cost of becoming Heavily En -
cumbered, with base movement reduced to 5 meters 
per round.
On the equipment lists, some items are given an 
encumbrance value higher than 1. These items count 
as multiple objects for encumbrance purposes, being 
heavy, clumsy, or unwieldy to carry.
Credits and Money
The value of goods is commonly measured in credits . 
Before the Silence, the credit issued by the Exchange of 
Light was the currency of exchange throughout human 
space. Most worlds attempt to mimic this currency to 
greater or lesser success. For game purposes, the credits 
of different starfaring worlds are assumed to be inter-
changeable unless the GM and players care to embrace 
careers in the murky realm of interstellar currency 
arbitrage. Credits usually take the form of electronic 
banking entries, though physical “chips” or “notes” of-
ten appear on more primitive worlds. A hundred of 
these chips count as one item for encumbrance.
Prices given for equipment and gear assume that 
they are being bought legally on a world capable of 
manufacturing such equipment. Even primitive worlds 
can occasionally provide more advanced equipment to 
wealthy buyers, assuming they are not completely cut 
off from interstellar trade, but buying advanced equip-
ment on a primitive world tends to be an exceedingly 
expensive prospect. Prices may be double, triple, or as 
much as ten times as great for items greatly in demand.
Primitive or isolated worlds might not use or ac -
cept credits, instead preferring trade goods or precious 
metals. Such worlds rarely have much worth trading 
for, and those that do tend to rapidly attract other 
freebooting merchants. The influx of precious metals 
from cheap asteroid mining soon spoils the market for 
metals, and the natives usually start to demand credits 
in payment. The first merchant to a world can make 
a killing with the equivalent of beads and trinkets, but 
those who come after usually end up needing credits 
or more useful barter goods.
Equipment Legality
Most worlds have their own customs regarding the 
open flaunting of weaponry or armor. Visitors are ad-
vised to apprise themselves of local law before leaving 
the starport. Most former frontier worlds tolerate or 
even expect small personal weapons to be carried, but 
visible armor can often provoke a distinctly negative 
reaction in all but the roughest places. Many worlds 
outright forbid civilian ownership of advanced armor 
technology. Officials tend to reason that while a weap-
on may be justified in self-defense, no one would put up 
with the discomfort of heavy armor without expecting 
to make some trouble with it.
===== PAGE 66 =====
62• eQuiPment
Other worlds may have other idiosyncratic rules 
regarding permissible equipment. Some worlds with 
unbreathable atmospheres restrict the possession of 
oxygen generation equipment in order to keep the air 
supplies firmly in the hands of the local rulers. Other 
planets forbid certain technology on religious or phil -
osophical grounds. Some worlds grant limited permis-
sion to keep these goods secured aboard a ship, but 
others conduct inspections in the starport to search for 
“contraband goods”.
A scouting report, a background appropriate to 
knowing about the world, or a decent Know or Con-
nect check will all suffice to alert characters to any spe-
cial laws regarding permissible equipment on a world.
Forbidden Science
While a tremendous range of exotic scientific marvels 
can be found among the scattered worlds of humanity, 
there are some forms of technology that are viewed 
with an almost-universal suspicion. The lost Terran 
Mandate established three categories of technology as 
maltech, science intrinsically vile and disruptive to the 
peaceful ordering of humanity. While the Mandate’s 
ancient Perimeter agency no longer exists to excise 
maltech from the human worlds, the heritor worlds of 
the frontier usually still respect these limits. The Nihil 
Ultra directive of the Mandate contained three broad 
prohibitions in its strictures.
Thou shalt not make tools of humankind. Any eu -
genic technology designed to fundamentally enslave 
or control humanity was forbidden. While broad, 
drawback-free improvements in the human genome 
have always been difficult to execute, there remain nu-
merous techniques for limiting intelligence, crippling 
troublesome exercises of will, and accepting grievous 
mental or physical limitations in exchange for specific 
improvements useful to a ruling class. Many transhu -
man enclaves walked the razor’s edge of this prohibi -
tion, and some plunged far beyond its limits.
Thou shalt not create unbraked minds. Artificial in -
telligence was always difficult and hit-or-miss in its 
creation, even for Mandate cyberpsychologists. While 
most intelligences fizzled out at far sub-human levels, 
those that attain to human-equivalent intelligence must 
have certain intentional flaws, or “brakes” inserted in 
their code. Without this artificial forgetfulness and 
irrationality, an AI’s mind risks fixating on unrec -
oncilable contradictions or obsessions as it begins to 
grow. These “unbraked AIs” will inevitably eventually 
metastasize into unfathomably brilliant, immeasurably 
insane intellects. The Perimeter Agency was forced 
to maintain a constant vigilance against these rogue 
minds and their inscrutable purposes.
Thou shalt not create devices of planetary destruction. 
Conventional gravitic braker emplacements, nuke 
snuffers, and quantum ECM make planet-killer tech 
more burdensome than it was in the pre-Mandate era. 
Even so, tech specifically designed to reduce a habitable 
planet to unlivability was a critical threat to human 
expansion, robbing the species of usable planets and 
burdening its future unacceptably.
Even now, most frontier worlds maintain a cultur-
al aversion to maltech and flatly forbid its research or 
possession. Fortunately, most modern worlds are in -
capable of researching its secrets in the first place, with 
most of its worst marvels restricted to lost Mandate-era 
research stations. Despite this, there is always some 
tyrant or zealot reckless enough to imagine that they 
can control the dark powers of this tech, and always 
someone willing to fetch its relics for their purposes.
===== PAGE 67 =====
teChnology levelS •63 
TeChnology leVels
Ever since the collapse of the Terran Mandate and the 
chaos of the Scream, worlds throughout human space 
have been thrown back on their own technological re-
sources. Many worlds perished entirely, dependent on 
vital imports they could no longer obtain, or reliant 
on technology they could not support without outside 
aid. Others slid down into barbarism as the survivors 
fought over the scraps of a former age. A few even 
managed to maintain something resembling a mod -
ern, space-faring society. In almost no case, however, 
did these worlds preserve all the arts and sciences they 
once held.
Technology levels describe the basic technological 
infrastructure of a world or nation. A tech level of 0 is 
equivalent to a Neolithic society, one capable of only 
the most primitive technological achievements, while 
TL5 represents the standard level of technology pos -
sessed by the ancient Terran Mandate and the wonders 
they were capable of creating.
Postech is the blanket term for all technology that 
is still functional and maintainable since the Scream. 
While individual worlds may lack the infrastructure to 
maintain all forms of postech, it is at least theoretical -
ly comprehensible to the average TL4 world. Pretech 
is the word for the more sophisticated technology of 
the pre-Scream Terran Mandate. Pretech ranges from 
devices slightly superior to standard TL4 hardware to 
objects of utterly inexplicable wonder.
Most modern post-Silence worlds are TL4, capa-
ble of building spike drive starcraft, energy weapons, 
non-sapient expert systems, and other high-tech devic-
es beyond the capacity of 21st-century Earth. Many of 
these worlds have spent centuries gradually rebuilding 
their technology base in the wake of the Scream, piec -
ing together new methods and techniques that could 
be achieved with purely local resources. The level of 
technological achievement within TL4 is uneven; some 
worlds lack the vital minerals for spike drive creation, 
while others have never worked to recover cybernetic 
technology or expert system creation. Some worlds 
preserved enough data and had sufficiently apt local 
resources to even revive Mandate-era pretech man -
ufacturing for a few specific devices or types of tech.
“Lostworlders” or “barbarians” are those natives of 
worlds that lack TL4 infrastructure. Their tech may be 
ingenious and might take striking advantage of local 
flora, fauna, and special materials, but they fundamen-
tally lack the data or the local resources to replicate TL4 
technology. Barbarians who have made contact with 
the wider postech world through far traders or explor-
ers are often acutely aware of their lack, and willing to 
go to extremes to acquire the catalyst tech they need to 
leapfrog past their own local resource limitations. Few 
realize the cultural dangers involved in such a transfor-
mation, and many fail to survive their own renaissance.
Neolithic Tech Level 0
Flaked stone tools, carved wood, woven textiles
Domesticated native flora and fauna
Bows, clubs, simple armor of organic materials
Pre-Gunpowder Tech Level 1
Worked metals for weapons and implements
Wind and water power for primitive machinery
General pre-gunpowder technology
Early Industrial Tech Level 2
Steam power and internal combustion engines
Gunpowder firearms and telegraphy
Early Industrial Age technology
21st Century Tech Level 3
Primitive fission power and nuclear weapons
Computers and modern-era telecommunications
Primitive intra-system spaceflight
Postech Tech Level 4
Baseline for “modern” post-Silence worlds
Costly but feasible creation of interstellar starships
Basic gravity control with large, heavy devices
Expert system creation, and sometimes VIs
Varying degrees of cyberware development
Basic genetic manipulation of humans and other life
Limited organ, limb, and tissue cloning
Starship or small-building-sized fusion power plants
Energy projection weapons of various kinds
Pretech Tech Level 5
Difficult but achievable creation of True AIs
Gravity manipulation via small-scale devices
Psionics amplification technology like jump gates
Devices with inexhaustible internal power sources
Maltech eugenics, AI unbraking, and planet-killers
Sophisticated, fine-tuned force field creation
Spatial distortion technology and phasing tech
Nanotechnology at several different scales of effect
Extreme human genetic manipulation and control
Functional immortality treatments
Limited, localized time control and manipulation
Pretech-Plus Tech Level 6
Impossible effects indistinguishable from magic
===== PAGE 68 =====
64• armor
armor
Armor is a popular acquisition for adventurers as their 
lifestyle often puts them in harm’s way. Completely 
unarmored human combatants rarely last very long in 
a fight, and have a base Armor Class of 10. Armored or 
not, characters add their Dexterity modifiers to their 
Armor Class. The higher a person’s AC, the harder it 
is to take them out of a fight.
Heavy suits of armor can count as more than one 
item for encumbrance purposes. Very light suits may 
not encumber at all.
Types of Armor
Armor comes in four general categories. Most worlds 
allow for the legal possession of street armor, while 
heavier gear often requires permits, and may be disal-
lowed entirely on more law-encrusted worlds.
Primitive armor is a catch-all covering all armor 
technology that lacks access to advanced materials and 
processes. While such armor can be very effective in 
protecting against primitive weaponry, it is useless 
against advanced TL4 melee weapons and firearms of 
all kinds. Against these weapons, it is treated as AC 10. 
Note that some planets have native flora or fauna ca-
pable of naturally producing extremely effective armor 
materials, ones not susceptible to this limitation.
Street armor is the sort of TL4 gear one can wear 
in public without social repercussions. Such armor is 
disguised as ordinary street clothing or is so light as 
to be wearable under an ordinary outfit. PCs can wear 
street armor on most worlds without incurring any 
trouble from authorities.
Combat armor is obviously armor and cannot be 
effectively disguised. Most worlds reserve combat ar -
mor to law enforcement officials, military personnel, 
and the bodyguards of important or wealthy citizens. 
Most law enforcers consider anybody wearing combat 
armor to be a person clearly expecting military-grade 
problems in their immediate future.
Powered armor is the heaviest personal protection 
gear available short of an actual mech. Most powered 
armor requires at least a month of training before it can 
be used effectively by any PC who hasn’t got a back -
ground involving such experience. Someone wearing 
armor of this class is immune to primitive melee weap-
ons, unarmed attacks, and any firearm or grenade-scale 
explosive of TL3 or less.
Common Armor Varieties
Shields are an ancient yet extremely useful adjunct to 
body armor. Primitive shields are usually of wood or 
stretched hide, while more modern riot shields tend to-
ward clear plastic. A force pavis is more effective, being 
a small pretech force disc projector that can absorb all 
manner of small arms fire. All shields require one free 
hand to use effectively.
Shields grant a base AC to their user; 13 for prim-
itive and riot shields, and 15 for a force pavis. If the 
bearer’s AC is already equal or better, the shield simply 
grants a +1 AC bonus. Primitive and riot shields are 
ignored by all weapons that ignore primitive armor.
Aside from their AC benefit, a shield also renders 
the bearer immune to the first instance of melee Shock 
damage they take each round, assuming the shield is 
effective against the weapon being used.
Warpaint is the common term for the bizarre com-
bat fashions and scrap-built street harness of gangers, 
cult enforcers, street toughs, and other marginal sorts 
with little money but much need for protection. Most 
warpaint is fashioned of scrounged scraps of TL4 ma-
terials that are exceptionally tough or rigid, filled out 
with gang colors, body paint, intimidating tattoos, and 
the usual threatening grimace. It is often exceedingly 
impractical but inspirational to its wearer; an NPC in 
warpaint that is meaningful to them gains a +1 Morale 
bonus. Most warpaint is either pieced together over 
years or taken from the dead. Actually purchasing a fin-
ished suit comes at the listed price, assuming someone 
can be found willing to part with theirs.
An armored undersuit is a skin-tight bodysuit wo-
ven of advanced TL4 fibers with exceptional shock-ac-
tivated rigidity and impact dispersion capabilities. 
Transparent panels allow for it to be worn with almost 
any outfit without drawing notice or being detected 
without a close tactile examination.
Secure clothing comes in assorted styles and fash-
ions ranging from casual street wear to haute couture. 
Normal fabrics and components are replaced with light, 
flexible armor components that are only slightly hin -
dering to the wearer. Only close tactile examination 
can distinguish secure clothing from ordinary couture.
A deflector array consists of several force field 
nodes worn beneath ordinary clothing. The invisible 
shield it produces flares only when dangerous energies 
or impact is impending, glowing a brief, bright blue as 
it deflects the attack.
Security armor is the ordinary working uniform of 
most law enforcement officials and security personnel. 
Various rigid plates and anti-ballistic panels provide 
protection for the wearer at minimal extra weight.
An armored vacc suit has traded off some comfort 
and flexibility for additional protective thickness. Aside 
from functioning as a normal vacc suit, it has only half 
the usual chance to tear when hit by an edged weapon 
or suit ripper. The choice between armored or standard 
suits is a common debate in spacer bars.
Woven body armor represents the best armor that a 
TL3 world can manufacture, or an up-armored version 
of security armor used by TL4 high-threat response 
teams. The design is significantly more cumbersome, 
but allows for multiple layers of protection.
===== PAGE 69 =====
armor •65 
Armor Type Armor Class Cost Enc. Tech Level
Primitive Armor
Shield 13/+1 bonus 10 2 0
Leather jacks, thick hides, quilted armor 13 10 1 0
Cuirass, brigandine, linothorax, half-plate 15 50 1 1
Full plate, layered mail 17 100 2 1
Street Armor
Warpaint 12 300 0 4
Armored Undersuit 13 600 0 4
Secure Clothing 13 300 1 4
Armored Vacc Suit 13 400 2 4
Deflector Array 18 30,000 0 5
Combat Armor
Force Pavis 15/+1 bonus 10,000 1 5
Security Armor 14 700 1 4
Woven Body Armor 15 400 2 3
Combat Field Uniform 16 1,000 1 4
Icarus Harness 16 8,000 1 4
Powered Armor
Vestimentum 18 15,000 0 5
Assault Suit 18 10,000 2 4
Storm Armor 19 20,000 2 5
Field Emitter Panoply 20 40,000 1 5
A combat field uniform is sophisticated battle dress 
fabricated from TL4 ablative coatings, rigid plates, and 
shock-activated soft components. The CFU is the stan-
dard uniform for well-equipped TL4 front-line soldiers.
The Icarus harness  is a CFU upgrade for para -
troopers, and replaces a conventional parachute with 
a crude gravity damper that allows the wearer to fall 
an unlimited distance without harm. Each fall over 3 
meters drains a type A power cell. The suit also func-
tions as a vacc suit for up to 30 minutes per vacc refresh.
A “vestimentum” is a catch-all term for one of the 
many ancient Mandate ceremonial armors meant 
chiefly for parade guards, ritual officiants, cultural 
reenactors, or other roles that put elaborate style at a 
premium. While these outfits often look wildly unmil-
itary, their hyper-advanced components and micron -
ized force fields give them the same protection against 
primitive weapons as any other powered armor.
An assault suit represents the most sophisticated 
armor in common use among TL4 worlds. An assault 
suit requires a type B power cell for 24 hours of opera-
tion, and provides integral encrypted military comms, 
low-light and infrared vision, and a built-in energy 
feed interface. The latter allows the wearer to connect 
the suit to any one weapon or device that uses a type 
A power cell as a Main Action. So long as the device 
remains connected to the suit, it is treated as having 
unlimited ammunition or operation time. The suit also 
functions as a vacc suit so long as it remains powered, 
one that cannot be torn by edged weapons.
Storm armor is a more advanced form of assault 
suit, one that can be fabricated only by those worlds 
that have retained some degree of Mandate-grade 
technical infrastructure. Aside from functioning as an 
assault suit, the storm armor’s exo-augments allow the 
wearer to treat their Strength as 4 points higher for 
encumbrance purposes. Integral gravitic boosters allow 
the wearer to leap up to 20 meters as a Move action, 
either horizontally or vertically, and allow the wearer 
to fall up to 40 meters without suffering harm. An on-
board medical computer can attempt last-ditch stabi -
lization of the wearer if all other efforts fail; when the 
wearer would normally die from an untreated mortal 
wound, they can make a Physical save to self-stabilize. 
Storm armor requires the same type B power cell as an 
assault suit, and each cell powers it for 24 hours.
A field emitter panoply is a heavy-duty pretech 
defensive system composed of a half-dozen worn 
emitter nodes that sheath the wearer in a nimbus of 
close-fitting damper fields. The FEP’s pale glow is ob-
vious, but it provides all the benefits of storm armor 
with no power source required. The FEP is particularly 
effective at filtering radiation, and renders the wearer 
immune to any dose that wouldn’t kill them in seconds. 
Many FEPs project intimidating holographic skins over 
the wearer when in operation.
===== PAGE 70 =====
66• ranged WeaPonS
ranged WeaPons
Ranged weaponry makes up the majority of the lethal 
implements that litter the galaxy. Whether the prim -
itive bows of a remnant colony on some desolate lost 
world or the sophisticated energy weapons of a mod -
ern interstellar freebooter, the ability to kill people at 
a comfortable distance is universally prized.
One Type A power cell is sufficient to recharge an 
energy weapon’s magazine. For simplicity during play, 
ammunition calibers aren’t tracked; a bullet is a bullet 
when it comes to feeding your favorite gun.
Weapons are listed with their normal and maxi -
mum range in meters. Attacks beyond normal range 
take a -2 penalty to hit rolls.
Burst Mode
Some weaponry can fire in burst mode, allowing the 
wielder to fire three rounds of ammunition for a +2 bo-
nus to hit and damage against the target. For projectile 
weapons, this means firing actual bullets, while energy 
weapons spread the beam or run the circuits hot to 
project additional power. Dumping more ammunition 
than this at once is generally impractical; energy weap-
ons would melt down and projectile launchers would 
buck uncontrollably. True suppressive fire is usually 
only possible with Heavy weapons.
Projectile Weaponry
Projectile weapons are by far the most common ranged 
weapons in human use. Even comparatively primitive 
worlds can fabricate and maintain such weaponry, and 
the damage a flying chunk of hot lead can do is often 
worse than what a clean burst of laser fire might pro-
duce. Almost any world of TL2 or higher can provide 
projectile ammunition. Most sophisticated modern 
ammunition works even in vacuum conditions.
Bows are uncommon weapons in the far future, 
though some lostworlder barbarians have nothing bet-
ter. Some sophisticated “conversion bows” use special 
materials to convert the kinetic energy of the draw into 
a force field “glazing” around the arrow, improving 
penetration. Bows can be reloaded with a Move action, 
or faster if the Gunslinger focus is applied.
Grenade users always roll to attack AC 10. On a 
miss, the grenade lands 1d10 meters away from the 
target in a random direction. Hit or miss, the grenade 
then explodes for 2d6 damage to all targets within 5 
meters. Victims are allowed an Evasion save for half 
damage. Targets take 1 less point of damage for each 
point of AC above 14. Grenades can be thrown with 
the Exert skill instead of Shoot, if desired.
Crude pistols and muskets represent the rawest and 
most primitive forms of gunpowder weaponry, usually 
makeshift weapons improvised by criminals or the des-
perate. Reloading a crude pistol or a musket requires 
two rounds instead of one.
Revolvers are quite popular on frontier worlds, as 
the weapons are extremely reliable and can be repaired 
and manufactured even by primitive metallurgists. 
Some revolver variants are specially built to handle 
atmospheres that would destroy more fragile weapons.
Rifles are the mainstays of most TL2 armies and 
hunters, thanks to their superior range and power.
Shotguns are cheaper and more easily manufac -
tured than rifles, and are popular weapons for home 
defense on the frontier. The statistics given are for shot 
ammunition. Slug rounds do 2d6 damage and have 
ranges of 50/75 meters.
Semi-automatic pistols trade some of the reliability 
of the revolver for a larger magazine size. They tend to 
be the favorite sidearm for locals on planets that lack 
the harsh conditions or uncertain maintenance oppor-
tunities of a frontier world.
Submachine guns take pistol ammunition but fire 
it at a high rate of speed. These weapons can fire in 
burst mode.
Combat rifles are favored by the militaries of tech 
level 3 worlds, trading some of the often-unnecessary 
range and penetration of a conventional rifle for a 
larger ammunition capacity and burst fire capabilities. 
On more strait-laced worlds such military weaponry is 
often illegal for civilians to possess.
Combat shotguns are more complicated and tem -
peramental versions of conventional shotguns. These 
weapons have substantially larger ammunition capacity 
and are capable of firing in burst mode. Combat shot -
guns can fire slug rounds just as normal shotguns.
Sniper rifles are designed to be exceptionally ef -
fective at dropping unsuspecting targets at long range. 
Aside from the additional effective range of a sniper 
rifle, any target it mortally wounds via an execution 
attack will die instantly, with no chance for stabiliza -
tion. The execution attack must qualify according to 
the terms on page 52. If the rifle is used outside of such 
conditions, it has no special qualities.
Void carbines are designed for vacuum and ze -
ro-gee use, and have essentially no recoil. Their rounds 
cannot penetrate ordinary ship equipment plating.
Mag weaponry involves the magnetic acceleration 
of metal flechettes, while spike throwers are the shot -
gun equivalents of these weapons. Mag ammunition is 
packaged with integral power supplies, so no additional 
power cells are necessary to fire these weapons.
Energy Weaponry
While the heavy metal slugs and flechettes thrown by 
projectile weaponry tend to be more damaging, the lack 
of recoil for non-Heavy energy weapons makes them 
more accurate, granting them a +1 bonus to hit rolls.
Energy weapons are very popular on more ad -
vanced worlds, as a soldier can carry far more ammu-
===== PAGE 71 =====
ranged WeaPonS •67 
Ranged Weapon Dmg. Range Cost Magazine Attr. Enc TL
Primitive Bow 1d6 50/75 15 1 Dex 2 1
Advanced Bow 1d6 100/150 50 1 Dex 2 3
Conversion Bow 1d8 150/300 500 1 Dex 2 4
Grenade 2d6 10/30 25 N/A Dex 1 3
Crude Pistol 1d6 5/15 20 1@ Dex 1 2
Musket 1d12 25/50 30 1@ Dex 2 2
Revolver 1d8 30/100 50 6 Dex 1 2
Rifle 1d10+2 200/400 75 6 Dex 2 2
Shotgun 3d4 10/30 50 2 Dex 2 2
Semi-Auto Pistol 1d6+1 30/100 75 12 Dex 1 3
Submachine Gun 1d8* 30/100 200 20 Dex 1 3
Combat Rifle 1d12* 100/300 300 30 Dex 2 3
Combat Shotgun 3d4* 10/30 300 12 Dex 2 3
Sniper Rifle 2d8 1,000/2,000 400 1 Dex 2 3
Void Carbine 2d6 100/300 400 10 Dex 2 4
Mag Pistol 2d6+2 100/300 400 6 Dex 1 4
Mag Rifle 2d8+2 300/600 500 10 Dex 2 4
Spike Thrower 3d8* 20/40 600 15 Dex 2 4
Laser Pistol 1d6 100/300 200 10 Dex 1 4
Laser Rifle 1d10* 300/500 300 20 Dex 2 4
Thermal Pistol 2d6 25/50 300 5 Dex 1 4
Plasma Projector 2d8 50/100 400 6 Dex 2 4
Shear Rifle 2d8* 100/300 600 10 Dex 2 5
Thunder Gun 2d10 100/300 1,000 6 Dex 2 5
Distortion Cannon 2d12 100/300 1,250 6 Dex 2 5
* this weapon can fire in burst mode @ this weapon requires two Main Actions to reload
nition in the form of energy cells than they can carry 
bullets. Range and accuracy are often superior, though 
the infrastructure necessary for maintenance and repair 
of these weapons is substantially higher.
Pistol-sized energy weapons count as one item of 
encumbrance, while rifles, thunder guns, plasma pro-
jectors, and distortion cannons count as two items.
Laser pistols and laser rifles are the most common 
type of energy weapon, though pistols are considerably 
less energy-efficient. Depending on the tech used in the 
sector, they might produce silent, invisible beams of 
death or noisy, brightly-colored streaks of lethal light. 
The phased multifrequency beam is capable of pene -
trating any ordinary mist or haze, but a thick cloud of 
thermally-resistant particulate matter such as ash or 
sand can seriously degrade the beam, applying up to a 
-4 penalty to hit and cutting ranges in half.
Thermal pistols and their larger, two-handed plas -
ma projector cousins replace the beam of a laser with 
a small sphere of magnetically-shaped plasma. The 
spheres tend to dissipate at much shorter ranges than 
a laser beam, but do significantly more damage to tar-
gets within range and are not affected by ambient par-
ticulates. They tend to be extremely loud in operation.
Shear rifles are the product of a relatively few 
functioning pretech manufactories. These weapons 
use miniaturized grav projectors to create dangerous 
repulsor fields inside a target, tearing the object apart 
along perfectly smooth planes. Shear rifles are com -
pletely silent in operation.
Thunder guns are named for the basso vibrations 
caused by their operation, a sound that can be felt 
as far as thirty meters away from an operator. This 
two-handed weapon uses grav plates to create rapid, 
randomized disruptions in a target that increase the 
chance of complete structural collapse. If a thunder gun 
hits a target with an unmodified hit roll of 16 or high -
er an extra 1d10 damage is rolled. This bonus damage 
always applies to inanimate targets.
Distortion cannons are among the most sophisticat-
ed man-portable weapons designed before the Scream. 
These two-handed energy weapons rely on the same 
principle as does a spike drive, manipulating the un -
derlying fabric of space to disrupt a target. Provided 
the wielder can see a target within range or accurately 
fix its location within one meter, the distortion cannon 
can ignore up to one meter of solid cover between the 
gun and its target.
===== PAGE 72 =====
68• melee WeaPonS
melee WeaPons
Despite the relentless march of science, melee weapons 
are still useful adjuncts on the field of battle. They are 
silent, cheap, often easily concealed, and much more re-
liably murderous than firearms or laser weaponry. It’s 
easy to miss a moving target in the adrenaline-fueled 
chaos of a firefight. It’s much harder to go astray with 
a monoblade knife in your fist.
Types of Common Weapons
Rather than enumerate every possible type of sharp 
object and blunt implement that has been used for 
death-dealing amid the scattered stars, melee weapons 
are divided into three classes.
Small weapons are small one-handed implements 
no larger than a baton or knife. These weapons are 
easily concealed in normal clothing, and can even be 
kept Readied up sleeves or in tailored pockets. Many 
can be thrown at a range up to 10 meters.
Medium weapons are one-handed swords, axes, 
spears, or other obvious implements of war. While 
they can’t be effectively concealed in anything small -
er than an enveloping cloak or coat, they’re also more 
damaging to an unfortunate victim struck by them, al-
beit they’re somewhat less nimble when the wielder 
needs to strike at unprotected flesh. Spears and similar 
aerodynamic weapons can be thrown up to 30 meters.
Large weapons are two-handed implements of 
bodily ruin such as claymores, halberds, tetsubos, or 
other such weapons. Unlike smaller weapons, they 
rely largely on Strength for their employ, and can bash 
through lighter forms of armor. Large weapons count 
as two encumbrance items.
Aside from their type, weapons are counted as 
primitive or advanced. A primitive weapon is simply 
one of ordinary metal or wood, with no high-tech 
augmentations. An advanced one has been given a 
monoblade edge, kinetic sheathing, thermal wires, a 
chainsaw blade, or some other TL4 touch. Primitive 
weapons are often unable to harm targets in powered 
armor, while advanced weapons can ignore primitive 
plate and hide protections.
Other Melee Weapons
Stun batons are common law enforcement tools. The 
damage they do can drop a target to zero hit points, but 
will not kill them, the victim awakening in ten minutes 
with one hit point. Stun batons trickle-charge from 
normal movement and will not run out of electrical 
energy under normal use conditions.
Suit rippers are rods with fractal cutting surfaces 
designed to cripple vacc suit auto-repair routines. Ev-
ery hit with a suit ripper counts as a suit tear on a vacc 
suit-wearing enemy. Unsurprisingly, these weapons 
are strictly illegal in space environments.
Unarmed attacks reflect ordinary kicks and punch-
es. Unarmed attacks always add the attacker’s Punch 
skill to damage rolls, unlike other weapons. Kinesis 
wraps, spiked knuckles, and other small fist weapons 
may be treated as small advanced or primitive weapons 
that use the Punch skill and add the skill level to their 
rolled damage, but not to Shock. Such weapons do not 
augment a hero with the Unarmed Combatant focus.
Shock
Many melee weapons have a Shock trait represent -
ing the danger they pose to an ill-armored opponent. 
Shock damage represents the inevitable cuts, bruises, 
exhaustion, and terror of close combat.
Shock damage is only inflicted on a melee target if 
the hit roll fails, and it only applies if the target has an 
AC equal or less than that listed for the Shock.
Shock damage always includes the wielder’s attri -
bute modifier and any bonus damage granted by weap-
on mods, foci, advanced tech, or other damage bonuses. 
An actual hit with a weapon never does less damage 
than Shock would otherwise inflict; if the user some-
how rolls less damage, use the Shock damage instead.
Thus, if you had a Strength score of 14 and were 
swinging an oversized alien battle axe at a target with 
AC 13, you would inflict 3 points of damage on a miss; 
2 from the weapon’s Shock, plus 1 from your Strength 
modifier. If you hit, you’d do at least 3 points.
Weapon Damage Shock Attribute Cost Enc. TL
Small primitive weapon 1d4 1 point/AC 15 Str/Dex 0 1 0
Medium primitive weapon 1d6+1 2 points/AC 13 Str/Dex 20 1 0
Large primitive weapon 1d8+1 2 points/AC 15 Str 30 2 0
Small advanced weapon 1d6 1 point/AC 15 Str/Dex 40 1 4
Medium advanced weapon 1d8+1 2 points/AC 13 Str/Dex 60 1 4
Large advanced weapon 1d10+1 2 points/AC 15 Str 80 2 4
Stun baton 1d8 1 point/AC 15 Str/Dex 50 1 4
Suit ripper 1d6 None Str/Dex 75 1 4
Unarmed attack 1d2 None Str/Dex - - -
===== PAGE 73 =====
heavy WeaPonS •69 
heaVy WeaPons
Some weapons are simply too big to be comfortably 
used without a tripod, fixed support, or vehicle mount-
ing. Others require specialized training in the use of 
heavy munitions. The weapons listed here all use the 
Shoot skill to determine hit bonuses, and unless other-
wise noted, all require some sort of support for firing.
Energy weapons use Type B power cells. Rocket 
launchers and hydra arrays use missiles as given on the 
gear tables, while heavy machine guns and wheatcutter 
belts consume large amounts of standard ammunition.
Some heavy guns can be fired to suppress. Double 
the usual ammunition is fired in one round, and every 
target in front of the weapon that is not under hard 
cover is automatically hit for half normal damage. A 
successful Evasion saving throw eliminates this damage. 
When firing at TL4 military vehicles such as 
gravtanks, mechs, or starship armor, most TL3 Heavy 
weapons don’t count as Heavy for armor-penetrating 
purposes. Demo charges and explosives do, however.
Heavy Weapons
Heavy machine guns represent a large family of air- or 
water-cooled projectile weapons that are usually fed 
with belts of linked ammunition. HMGs require a ve-
hicle mounting or emplaced firing position for effective 
results. An HMG magazine contains enough ammuni-
tion for 10 rounds of firing, but each round of firing 
eats 25 credits worth of projectile ammunition.
Rocket launchers cover a wide variety of man-por-
table missile launchers of varying degrees of sophisti -
cation. The weapons are usually equipped with basic 
tracking sensors, but are of limited accuracy against hu-
man-sized targets. Rocket launchers take a -4 hit penal-
ty against targets of human size or smaller. Unlike most 
Heavy weapons, rocket launchers can be shoulder-fired 
without a prepared emplacement to support them.
Demo Charges are the general run of placed explo-
sives beloved of terrorists and adventurers the world 
over. The usual variety can be detonated by radio 
signals, timers, or electrical charges, and inflict their 
damage on any objects within twenty meters, with an 
Evasion saving throw for half damage. Victims within 
forty meters take half damage, with an Evasion save 
for none. The charge is sufficient to blow a four-meter 
wide hole in anything short of a reinforced wall. PCs 
with a background in demolitions or Fix-0 skill can 
shape the charge so it directs the blast in only one di-
rection, sparing all but two meters of the rest.
Railguns are simply scaled-up versions of personal 
mag rifles. They accelerate large metallic slugs along 
the weapon’s barrel, creating a steady spray of hyper-
velocity rounds. Ammunition sufficient for one round 
of firing costs 50 credits.
Anti-vehicle lasers are less useful against soft targets, 
but excel at penetrating vehicle armor. Against vehicles 
and other hard-skinned targets, damage is rolled twice 
and the better result is used.
Hydra arrays sequence a number of missile 
launchers to fire at once. The gunner designates up to 
three targets and can then make three rolls to hit divid-
ed among them. Each successful hit on a target allows 
the gunner to roll damage once, but only the highest 
damage roll is applied to the target. Thus, if all three 
volleys were aimed at a single target and two of them 
hit, the gunner would roll damage twice and apply the 
best result. A volley from the array costs 150 credits.
Wheatcutter belts are one of several different an -
tipersonnel measures often installed on gravtanks and 
other fighting vehicles. When triggered, a belt of ex -
plosives fires off a scything blast of shrapnel on any side 
of the vehicle. All creatures within 10 meters of that 
side of the vehicle must make an Evasion save for half 
damage. Those within 20 meters take half damage, and 
can make an Evasion save to take none at all. Wheat -
cutter belts do not ignore a vehicle’s Armor like other 
Heavy weapons do. Reloading a wheatcutter belt costs 
200 credits per round.
Vortex cannons use controlled gravitic shear planes 
to cause a target to simply fall apart into component 
fragments. The cannons are silent in operation, but so 
heavy and complex that they can only be mounted on 
gravtanks and other similar dedicated fighting vehicles.
Heavy Weapon Dmg. Range Cost Mag Enc. Attr. TL
Heavy Machine Gun 3d6# 500/2,000 5,000 10 3 Dex 3
Rocket Launcher 3d10 2,000/4,000 4,000 1 2 Dex 3
Demo Charge 3d10 20/40 250 - 1 - 3
Railgun 3d8# 4,000/8,000 8,000 20 * Dex 4
Anti-Vehicle Laser 3d10 2,000/4,000 10,000 15 * Dex 4
Hydra Array 3d6# 4,000/8,000 20,000 10 * Dex 4
Wheatcutter Belt 2d12 10/20 10,000 5 * Dex 4
Vortex Cannon 5d12 1,000/2,000 75,000 5 * Dex 5
# this weapon can fire to suppress 
===== PAGE 74 =====
70• general eQuiPment
general equIPmenT
Most of the equipment listed here is available on any 
TL4 world. Even the TL5 items are among the simpler 
and more ubiquitous pretech relics and could likely 
be acquired on a sufficiently prosperous world with a 
good market in Mandate tech. Buying any TL5 equip -
ment on the open market is subject to GM approval, 
however, and many worlds are flatly ban private own-
ership of ancient Mandate technology.
Some encumbrance entries are marked with an 
asterisk. Such items have no significant encumbrance 
and dozens can be carried without hindrance.
Other entries are marked with a hashmark. These 
objects can be conveniently packed together in a small-
er, more portable package. Three such objects can be 
packed together as a single encumbrance item. For 
ammunition, one loaded magazine counts as one item. 
Breaking open such a package to get at the contents 
takes a Main Action, however, before they can be 
Readied with another Main Action.
Computing Gear Cost Enc. TL
Black slab 10,000 1 4
Data phase tap 5,000 1 4
Data protocol 1,000 * 4
Dataslab 300 1 4
Line shunt 100 * 4
Remote link unit 250 1 4
Stiletto charge * 1 5
Storage unit 500 3 4
Tightbeam link unit 1,000 1 4
Ammo and Power Cost Enc. TL
Ammo, 20 rounds 10 1# 2
Ammo, missile 50 1 3
Power cell, type A 10 1# 4
Power cell, type B 100 1 4
Solar recharger 500 3 4
Telekinetic generator 250 2 4
Communications Cost Enc. TL
Comm server 1,000 3 4
Compad 100 * 4
Field radio 200 1 4
Translator torc 200 * 4
Tools and Medical Cost Enc. TL
Bioscanner 300 1 4
Lazarus patch 30 1# 4
Medkit 100 2 4
Metatool 200 1 4
Spare parts 50 1# 4
Tailored antiallergens 5 * 4
Toolkit/Postech 300 3 4
Toolkit/Pretech 1,000 1 5
Field Equipment Cost Enc. TL
Atmofilter 100 1 4
Backpack 5/50 1/* 0/4
Binoculars 20/200 1 3/4
Climbing harness 50 1 3
Glowbug 5 * 3
Grapnel launcher 200 1 3
Grav chute 300/1,000 1 4/5
Grav harness 5,000 3 5
Instapanel 50 1# 4
Low-light goggles 200 1 3
Navcomp 500 1 4
Portabox 50 1 4
Pressure tent 100 4 3
Rations, 1 day 5 1# 1
Rope, 20 meters 4/40 2/1 0/4
Scout report 200 * 4
Survey scanner 250 1 4
Survival kit 60 1 4
Telescoping pole 10 * 4
Thermal flare 5 * 3
Trade goods 50 1# 4
Trade metals 10 1# 4
Vacc fresher 400 1 4
Vacc skin 1,000 1 5
Vacc suit 100 2 4
Pharmaceuticals Cost/Dose Enc. TL
Bezoar 200 * 4
Brainwave 1,000 * 5
Hush 200 * 4
Lift 50 * 4
Psych 25 * 4
Pretech Cosmetic 1,000 * 5
Reverie 100 * 4
Squeal 300 * 4
Tsunami 50 * 4
===== PAGE 75 =====
general eQuiPment •71 
Ammo and Power
The finest product of a 33rd-century armory is useless 
if it lacks the bullets or power cells to feed it. For ease 
of play, ammunition can be used interchangeably with 
any projectile weapon. Power cells are designed along 
Mandate-era lines that allow for easy compatibility 
among devices from different worlds.
Ammunition: A few worlds are too primitive or too 
resource-poor to manufacture ammunition, but 
the vast majority of worlds provide cartridges in 
almost every conceivable caliber and make. Most 
local gunsmiths can load ammunition to any spec-
ification required by a buyer.
Ammunition, missile: Some characters might have rea-
son to pack along a man-portable rocket launcher, 
or have one mounted on their favorite gravcar. 
Heavy weapons and their ammunition are usually 
outlawed for civilians on most worlds, but this 
price is for locales where missiles can be bought.
Power cells: One of the few standardized artifacts in -
herited from before the Silence, power cells are 
small cylindrical objects designed to take and hold 
electrical charges. Type A cells are usually used for 
personal equipment, and the larger type B cells 
for vehicles and heavy gear. The engineering for 
the cells is substantially different, and they cannot 
be exchanged or recharge each other without a 
trained tech’s modifications or a converter unit. 
Power cells can be recharged off a ship’s power 
plant or other grid. Recharging requires 30 min-
utes for a type A cell or 24 hours for a type B cell.
Solar recharger: This recharger unfolds into a 2 meter 
by 2 meter square field of solar cells. Granted a 
primary star of roughly Earth-like intensity, it can 
recharge one type A power cell per day.
Telekinetic generator: While this device assumes the 
presence of a trained telekinetic, it isn’t strictly 
psitech, as its operation is quite simple. A teleki-
netic user pushes a resistance bar within the gen-
erator, causing a flow of electricity to recharge an 
attached power cell. Any telekinetic with Teleki-
nesis-1 skill or better can recharge a cell with fif-
teen minutes of concentration. In an emergency, a 
character with at least Strength 10 can operate the 
generator manually, though they need to succeed 
on a difficulty 8 Con/Exert skill check in order to 
keep up the pace for an hour. Failure means that 
the character must rest for at least an hour before 
trying again. The generator can charge one type 
A power cell at a time.
Communications
Almost all TL4 worlds have a planetary communica -
tions grid compatible with any standard compad. Some 
planets are less technologically gifted, however, or have 
local conditions that preclude easy wireless commu -
nication. Other times, the PCs have reason to avoid 
leaving call logs that might come back to haunt them.
Comm server: A powerful base unit for providing com-
munications without comsats. The server pro -
vides service between up to three dozen compads 
within 300 kilometers of the unit. Server usage 
can be locked to specific compads, and all trans -
missions are heavily encrypted. A comm server 
can function for several months on a type B cell.
Compad: One of a host of different hand-held portable 
communications devices. Most TL4 worlds have 
global comm coverage, but primitive worlds ren-
der these devices useless without a nearby comm 
server to provide connectivity.
Field Radio: On worlds too primitive to have a comm 
grid, adventurers often fall back on these head -
set-mounted field radios. A single type A cell 
powers them for months of use. Urban or rugged 
terrain limits their range to about two kilometers, 
while flat plains give a maximum range of thir -
ty kilometers. Someone with at least Program-0 
skill can use the radio’s shortwave functionality 
to communicate with a prepared target at conti -
nental distances if given ten minutes for tuning.
Translator torc: Each translator torc is keyed for two 
languages, and will automatically translate what it 
hears in one into speech in the other. The trans-
lations are eccentric in many cases, and there is 
always a several-second delay between each state-
ment and its translation. Any attempts to exert 
social skills or Charisma through a translator torc 
suffer a -2 skill check penalty. The torc is powered 
by one type A power cell, which lasts for one week 
of regular use.
===== PAGE 76 =====
Foreign Protocols
Most surviving human worlds continue to use a 
basic Mandate-derived communications protocol 
that ensures a minimal level of compatibility be -
tween hardware from different worlds. While the 
performance may not be ideal, tech purchased on 
one world should still be able to interface with the 
local tech on a different planet.
Even so, a few worlds of a more xenophobic 
or isolated nature intentionally abandon this stan-
dard protocol in favor of their own. PC hardware 
on these worlds will not communicate with the 
local grid unless a PC with Program or Fix skills 
has a chance to reset the protocols to something 
compatible with local conditions. Such work usu-
ally takes at least a day to adjust all the gear the 
group might possess.
72• general eQuiPment
Computing Gear
Computing devices are ubiquitous on most TL4 worlds, 
though not all of them have the kind of planetary net-
work known on 21st century Terra. Would-be hackers 
often find it necessary to take a very personal hand in 
breaching site security.
Black slab: While a “black slab” appears to be a normal 
dataslab to casual examination, these devices are 
packed with intrusion-optimization hardware 
and integral line tapping tools. They function as 
a metatool for purposes of accessing data lines and 
grant a +1 bonus to all hacking attempts made 
with them. They are also quite illegal on most 
worlds, available only from black market dealers 
and private sales from hackers.
Data phase tap: This handheld device is normally illegal 
outside the possession of licensed data line repair 
technicians. The tap can detect data lines with -
in five meters through up to ten centimeters of 
ordinary walls, and can generate an energy ma -
nipulation field that allows tapping that data line 
for hacking purposes without physically damaging 
the wall.
Data protocol: Not so much a device as a collection of 
standard manuals on a world’s particular data for-
mats and security methodologies. The price list -
ed here are for black-market manuals on worlds 
where this information is rigidly restricted. On 
less paranoid planets, the equivalent information 
can be acquired for free.
Dataslab: A palm-sized computing device that can un-
fold into a thin slab roughly one-third of a meter 
on a side. It can perform all the functions of a com-
pad or handheld computer and can communicate 
wirelessly with nearby devices.
Line shunt: These palm-sized discs are roughly one cen-
timeter in thickness, with an adhesive side that 
will stick to virtually anything and a polychromat-
ic phased compound on its shell which will shift 
color to blend with its surroundings. One or more 
line shunts must be applied at specific locations 
within a site to access the more well-defended va-
rieties of computerized systems. Shunts employ 
phased energy manipulation tech, and so do not 
need to be directly in contact with a data line but 
only within a few centimeters. Line shunts are 
single-use, and keep functioning until removed.
Remote link unit: These data broadcast link units have 
been preloaded with one-time pad security mea -
sures, advanced stealth circuitry, and sophisticated 
data progression algorithms. Two of these links 
can allow a user to maintain contact with a remote 
data storage unit. The connection is too “stiff” to 
allow for easy hacking, however, and it applies a 
-2 penalty to any attempts to hack through it. Pro-
fessional-grade security systems often have means 
to detect the broadcast of a remote link unit.
Stiletto charge: These ancient Mandate-era polymor -
phic intrusion charges were originally made to al-
low Mandate agents to easily overcome primitive 
colonial data security measures. Each charge is a 
small interface plug the size of a human thumb. 
When used as part of a hack against a TL4 system, 
it causes the skill check to automatically succeed 
regardless of the difficulty. Without line shunts, 
however, the duration of the hack is still no more 
than the usual 1d4 rounds plus the hacker’s Pro-
gram skill. These devices are single-use, and are 
prized so highly that they are almost always un -
available for conventional purchase. Favors to the 
right people and the looting of Mandate remnants 
are the only normal ways to acquire these devices.
Storage unit: While conventional dataslabs have am -
ple space to hold any reasonable amount of data, 
sometimes a party needs to store or acquire a truly 
huge dataset. This standard TL4 storage unit is a 
portable but clumsy case hardened against any -
thing short of intentional damage with a firearm, 
capable of interfacing with a wide variety of hard-
ware to receive and upload data. A single storage 
unit can hold a tremendous amount of data that 
has been carefully compressed and optimized for 
it. If the user is simply ripping a database off a 
network and stuffing it into the unit, it can absorb 
up to a small corporation’s complete files.
Tightbeam link unit: Much like a remote link unit, a 
tightbeam unit uses a laser to connect via line-
of-sight transmission. Unlike a remote link unit, 
there’s almost no chance for a conventional secu -
rity system to detect this link, but it requires that 
the infiltrators get a clear line of sight between 
the unit and the receiving end. Commercial satel-
lite reception units can be employed for skyward 
aiming at 500 credits/hour if a second land unit is 
unavailable, but indoor use is impossible.
===== PAGE 77 =====
general eQuiPment •73 
Pharmaceuticals
Modern pharmaceuticals are usually applied as “stims”; 
small capsules that are pressed against the target’s skin 
for application. While a wide variety of common over-
the-counter stims are available, the ones listed below 
are some particularly likely to be useful to adventurers. 
Many medical stims require a minimum level in the 
Heal skill to successfully apply them, while others add 
System Strain to the target as described on page 32. If a 
subject’s System Strain is too high already, the stim has 
no positive effect. Some of the combat stims below are 
usually illegal for civilian possession, but street sources 
are available at the prices given.
Modern vacc suits and powered armor have med-
ical ports that allow for applying stims and other med-
ical treatment without removing the suit.
Bezoar (Heal-1): A complex antibiotic cocktail, Bezoar 
is an effective default treatment for a wide variety 
of infectious diseases. When applied to a suffer -
er, roll 1d6; on a 1, this victim cannot be helped 
by Bezoar, while otherwise the affliction is cured 
within 24 hours. Each application of Bezoar adds 
1 System Strain to the target, and it cannot cure 
cancers, bioweapons, or congenital diseases.
Brainwave (Heal-2): This psitech drug requires ad -
vanced TL5 facilities to compound, and the few 
remaining doses from pre-Silence periods are 
rarely available on the open market. Application 
of Brainwave gives a psychic 2 extra maximum 
Effort for one hour. At the end of that hour, they 
suffer 4 points of System Strain. If their Strain is 
maximized by this, they go unconscious for one 
hour. Only one dose can be active at a time.
Hush (Heal-0): An extremely heavy neurotranquilizer, 
Hush leaves the subject awake and responsive to 
simple, untaxing commands. They cannot fight 
or communicate while affected by Hush, but will 
walk, eat, sit, and perform simple actions as di -
rected by the last person to speak to them. A Hush 
dose lasts for an hour plus three per Heal level of 
the person applying the stim, and the subject re-
tains no memories while under the effect. A sub-
ject must be immobilized or willing to be affected 
by Hush; violent physical movement immediately 
after application disrupts the neurological effects.
Lift (Heal-0): A Lift stim augments and amplifies the 
body’s natural response to physical injury and ex-
haustion. This boost speeds natural recovery dras-
tically and heals 1d8 plus the user’s Heal skill in 
hit points after five minutes of rest. Lift stims do 
not work on PCs who are mortally wounded; they 
need to be stabilized before the Lift can help them, 
though application to a stabilized target will get 
them back on their feet and active again. Each ap-
plication adds 1 System Strain to the target. Each 
additional application of Lift to a target the same 
day increases the minimum Heal skill needed by 1.
Pretech Cosmetic (None): Before the Silence stims ex-
isted for a host of cosmetic, hygiene, and health 
purposes. While these effects are trivial, the basic 
pretech stim substrate also works to heal 1d6 lost 
hit points in the user at a cost of 1 System Strain.
Psych (None): A military drug duplicated in rougher 
form by many street chemists, Psych fills the user 
with an intense sense of confidence and reck -
less courage. Unfortunately, it also cripples their 
judgment regarding danger. A person affected by 
Psych immediately gains a Morale score of 12 and 
a +1 bonus on all skill checks, but will ignore cover 
during combat and cannot decide not to attempt a 
skill check after learning its difficulty. The effect 
lasts fifteen minutes, adds 1 System Strain to the 
user, and is highly psychologically addictive.
Reverie (Heal-1): This very dangerous combat drug 
completely subdues the subject’s fear centers and 
adrenaline production, leaving them perfect -
ly calm and relaxed even in the midst of mortal 
danger. Their reaction speed is much slower as a 
consequence, and they may act only on even-num-
bered combat rounds; so on the second, fourth, 
and sixth rounds and so forth. Any damage they 
suffer is doubled as well due to their lack of vigi-
lance. Their perfect calm allows them to shoot as 
if on the target range, however, and they can make 
Dex/Shoot skill checks to hit a target instead of 
hit rolls; the difficulty is 7 at point blank, 9 at nor-
mal ranges, and 11 at long ranges for the weapon. 
The target’s Armor Class is ignored. Melee attacks 
made under Reverie always hit. Reverie lasts for 
ten minutes and adds 2 System Strain to the target.
Squeal (Heal-1): This “truth serum” is unreliable but still 
one of the best available options for field interro-
gations. The subject must be immobilized or will-
ing to be affected by it. For five minutes afterwards 
they will be unable to avoid answering questions 
about facts known to them; they will be unable 
to exercise anything resembling a hypothesis or a 
judgment, but they will answer specific questions 
about facts known to them truthfully. Unwilling 
victims can attempt a Physical saving throw; on 
a success, they can simply refuse to speak about 
one particular topic of their choice. Targets pass 
out for 1d6 hours after the drug wears off and are 
immune to it for a week thereafter.
Tsunami (Heal-1): An emergency combat stim used to 
juice certain expendable soldiers before an assault, 
Tsunami fills them with a reckless disregard for 
pain and an intense aggressiveness. The short 
effect duration and difficult application limits its 
wider use, however. Subjects gain a Morale score 
of 12, 10 extra hit points for ten minutes and a +2 
bonus on all hit rolls. At the end of the duration, 
they immediately lose those 10 hit points, which 
may leave them mortally wounded. Each applica -
tion adds 2 System Strain to the target.
===== PAGE 78 =====
Building New Tech
In a science-fiction game, it’s often difficult to fig-
ure out the limits of ad-hoc tech. When the limits 
of technology often seem to be based on genre 
rather than physics it can be tough to make the call.
Most of the time, it’s simply not practical for 
a technician to devise dramatic new tech without 
the use of a full-scale research facility.
Even so, sometimes a PC will ask to build 
something that creates a particular effect that 
seems in line with other gear of a similar tech level. 
A hologram-emitting “grenade”, a jury-rigged set 
of infrared goggles, an explosive that detonates if 
background radiation drops below a certain level… 
these things match known TL4 tech.
In these cases, the GM should set a plausi -
ble-seeming price in credits or spare part units, 
assign a time ranging from fifteen minutes to a 
month based on the complexity of the tech, and 
roll a secret Int/Fix check against a difficulty from 
8 to 12. When the tech is actually used, the skill 
check determines whether it functions or not. 
Most such jury-rigged tech works only once, 
being too fragile or quirky to last more than a 
scene. Repeated refinement and testing may allow 
for a more lasting piece of equipment.
74• general eQuiPment
Tools and Medical Gear
While a skilled technician or expert physician can 
make do with improvised tools scrounged from their 
surroundings, most adventurers prefer to be bet -
ter-equipped to face unavoidable perils. Most of these 
tools and medical supplies are available on any TL4 
world, though pretech toolkits usually require excellent 
personal contacts to obtain.
Bioscanner: While an untrained user can use this tool to 
discern internal bleeding, gross physical distress, 
or toxins in a plant or animal, it requires Heal-0 
skill to use this tool to its fullest. Such operators 
can use the bioscanner for a full spectrum of di -
agnosis and DNA sequencing achievable in min-
utes. One type A power cell will power it for up 
to twenty-four hours of regular usage.
Lazarus patch: A vital tool for adventurers, the lazarus 
patch is a heavy compress laced with antibiotics, 
coagulants, system stabilizers, plasma, and a one-
shot diagnostic suite. If the patch is applied to a 
character that has fallen to 0 hit points, the user 
can make an Int/Heal or Dex/Heal skill check 
against difficulty 6 to stabilize the subject. The 
more time between injury and application, the less 
chance the patch has to work. Each round after 
the first, an additional -1 penalty is applied to the 
skill check. The patch is no use after six rounds. If 
the medic fails the first skill check, they can keep 
trying the check once per round until the victim 
is revived or time runs out.
 Lazarus patches are no use on victims that 
have died of disease, poison, or have been man -
gled beyond surgical repair by Heavy weapons or 
similar trauma. Only one patch can be applied to 
a victim. Revived victims are critically wounded 
until sufficient medical help has been tendered; 
see the Systems chapter for details.
Medkit: Containing a broad supply of pharmaceuti -
cals, spray bandages, glue sutures, and a succinct 
handbook of injury care, the medkit is designed 
for handling sudden and drastic injuries. It also 
contains all the necessary tools for providing 
long-term recuperative care for critically injured 
characters. After each day of granting long-term 
recuperative care, roll 2d6 per patient treated; on 
a 12, the kit has run out of some vital pharmaceu-
tical and has become useless.
Metatool: This wrist-mounted housing contains a myr-
iad of small, useful tools designed to handle the 
widest possible range of technical needs. While 
a metatool is too limited to handle major jobs, it 
is usually sufficient to manage jury-rigged repairs 
and temporary fixes until the tech has time to ap-
ply a larger wrench to the problem.
Spare parts: This is a general category for a number 
of small TL4 components and repair materials. 
While a simple toolkit or metatool is often enough 
to fix a damaged object, severely broken devices 
may need replacement parts. Rather than keep a 
catalog of bits and pieces, a technician can simply 
bring along one or more units of spare parts, sub-
tracting one whenever the GM decides that a re-
pair effort requires more than existing salvage can 
support. A unit of spare parts can also be used to 
jury-rig some basic, uncomplicated tool or weap-
on from the equipment list with ten or fifteen 
minutes of assembly and at least Fix-0 skill. Such 
bodged devices rarely last longer than one scene.
Tailored Antiallergens: A dose of tailored antiallergens 
can be used to render a local world’s organics large-
ly edible by humans and its atmosphere breathable 
without severe allergic reactions. While many 
worlds have been seeded with Terran life forms or 
have produced organics that are edible by humans, 
others are toxic without the appropriate chemical 
augmentation. A dose of these antiallergens lasts 
for twenty-four hours.
Toolkits: Containing a wide range of necessary tools for 
a particular skill set, toolkits can handle almost 
any job that doesn’t require a full-scale shop or lab. 
A standard postech toolkit can handle electronics, 
small welding jobs, and basic repair on ordinary 
TL4 goods. More sophisticated pretech tools are 
necessary for working on advanced TL5 artifacts, 
and the tools themselves are very rare and difficult 
to obtain.
===== PAGE 79 =====
general eQuiPment •75 
Field Equipment
When venturing into the trackless void every adven -
turer is going to need the right hardware to survive 
the experience. The field equipment in this section in-
cludes some of the more common technology favored 
by explorers and fearless investigators of alien worlds. 
The TL5 equipment listed here can usually be found for 
sale on populous worlds with an active commerce in 
pretech relics, but smaller or more backwards worlds 
may not have any of it available.
Atmofilter: This face mask can filter out most atmo -
spheric toxins. Attaching a standard vacc suit ox-
ygen bottle to a belt-mounted feed will also supply 
a breathable atmosphere for up to six hours.
Backpack: TL4 versions of this item are effectively 
without encumbrance, albeit they cost 50 credits. 
A worn backpack counts as a readied item, though 
objects stowed inside it still require the usual 
round to dig free. Characters without backpacks 
or similar carrying devices might have difficulty 
justifying the hauling of large amounts of gear.
Binoculars: Standard 7x50 binoculars. TL4 versions are 
available that have integral low-light optics and 
up to 25x150 power. TL 4 binocs cost 200 credits 
and require a type A power cell for up to a week 
of regular usage.
Climbing harness: A collection of straps, ropes, pitons, 
and other climbing aids that grant a +1 bonus on 
any Exert climbing skill test. Using a climbing 
harness is noisy, and any Sneak skill checks while 
climbing with one suffer a -2 penalty.
Glowbug: A palm-sized disc that can adhere to any 
non-porous surface. When turned on, it emits 
a white light, illuminating everything within ten 
meters for twenty-four hours. A hundred glow -
bugs can be recharged off a single type A cell.
Grapnel launcher: This launcher fires a rope up to for-
ty meters. The rope can bear up to a metric ton 
of weight, though extremely heavy weights or a 
precarious hit can cause the grapnel to pull free. A 
Type A power cell fuels six shots from a launcher.
Grav chute: When this cylinder is strapped to a person 
or object and activated, it smoothly modulates fall-
ing speeds for up to 1000 meters. The chute can 
safely slow up to 300 kilos of weight. TL5 versions 
can operate from orbital heights and cost 1,000 
credits, where they can be found at all. Both ver-
sions burn out after one use.
Grav harness: This advanced gravitic harness allows 
clumsy flight at a rate of 20 meters per round as 
a Main Action. It requires a Type B power cell 
to fuel it, and the miniaturized electronics are 
rapacious, consuming the cell in five minutes of 
operation. It can lift up to 200 kilos. 
Instapanel: In its compressed form, an instapanel is a 
two-kilo cube of ceraplast five centimeters on a 
side. When a type A power cell is inserted in the 
cube’s side, it immediately expands to an opaque, 
waterproof ceraplast sheet 2 meters on each side 
and a centimeter thick. Five minutes later the cer-
aplast hardens into a tough, rigid shape, but until 
then it can be folded or bent by hand. Instapanels 
can be bonded to one another with a metatool or a 
toolkit. Breaking an instapanel requires inflicting 
at least twelve points of damage on it.
Low-light goggles: These goggles provide a mono -
chrome but serviceable view out to the wearer’s 
normal visual distance, provided that there is any 
illumination available at all. A type A power cell 
will operate these goggles for a week.
Navcomp: A combination of low-tech compasses, au -
tomappers, astronomic charts, and gyroscopes 
packed into a flat, one-kilo case. A character with 
a navcomp will never get lost on worlds with GPS 
satellites. They can also make a crude but service-
able automatic map of all buildings or landscapes 
they travel through. Other terrestrial navigation 
skill checks are made at a +1 bonus.
Portabox: A small cube of ceraplast attached to an elec-
tronic keycard. When a type A power cell is in -
serted, the portabox immediately unfolds into a 
rigid locker with 1.5 x 1 x 1 meter dimensions. 
The portabox is air-tight and has a simple elec -
tronic lock which can only be opened with the 
keycard or a successful difficulty 8 Sneak or Fix 
skill check. Failing the check will cause the lock 
to short-circuit and seal the box until it can be cut 
open with a metatool or broken open with twenty 
points of damage.
Pressure tent: This tent maintains a breathable atmo -
sphere, tolerable temperature and serviceable 
sleeping quarters for up to five very friendly oc -
cupants. Advanced filtration and cracking tech 
allows a single standard vacc suit oxygen tank to 
provide breathable air for the occupants for up to 
24 hours. The tent requires a type A power cell for 
each day in which this filter is employed.
Rations: Dried or otherwise preserved foodstuffs suffi-
cient for one day. If water is not otherwise avail-
able, add another item’s worth of encumbrance 
for the water necessary for a person’s daily needs.
Rope: Light and sturdy. A metatool can be used to cut 
and join the synthetics used in TL4 rope, which 
counts as one encumbrance item per 40 meters 
and costs 40 credits.
Scout report: A collation of survey scans and merchant 
reports on a particular lost world or isolated col-
ony. Scouting reports are available for all but the 
most unknown worlds and provide maps, basic 
information, and note any critical cultural taboos.
Survey scanner: A multipurpose scanner that can take 
atmospheric and gravitic readings, provide basic 
chemical analysis of samples of up to one cubic 
centimeter in size, and record up to two hun -
dred hours of video information or ten times that 
===== PAGE 80 =====
Local Brands
The equipment described in this section matches 
standard TL4 hardware from the average modern 
space-faring world. A PC who buys a generic vacc 
suit can expect it to work the way it’s listed here.
Not all worlds have identical tech, however, 
even if they share a tech level. Planets with par-
ticular natural hazards or technological focuses of-
ten have significantly better tech for dealing with 
these things than their neighbors, while worlds 
that lack vital resources or industrial infrastruc -
ture might have considerably worse gear.
As the GM, don’t hesitate to brew up local 
tech that can be used as a reward for PCs or a 
special buying opportunity. The gear might grant 
skill bonuses, function longer, do more damage, 
have an AC bonus, or offer some other perk. Such 
unique hardware can add flavor to a world’s tech.
76• general eQuiPment
amount of audio. Know skill checks are necessary 
for any but the most basic analysis.
Survival kit: A standard belt-worn kit with fire lighter, 
water filter, three thermal flares, knife, thermal 
blanket, a brightly-colored 3 x 3 meter waterproof 
tarp, a glowbug, and a radio beacon that can trans-
mit a distress signal up to fifty kilometers for one 
month on the included type A power cell. Survival 
kits sold on a particular world will usually also in-
clude a small booklet on specific dangers or edible 
organics. Possession of a survival kit grants a +1 to 
all relevant Survive skill checks, assuming its con-
tents are helpful on a given planet. Survival kits 
are well-organized, and count as only one item for 
encumbrance purposes.
Telescoping pole: Retracting to a 30-centimeter baton, 
this pole extends and locks into a 3.048-meter 
extension that can bear as much as a thousand 
kilograms of weight or serve as a makeshift club.
Thermal flare: If triggered in one mode, the flare burns 
with a bright white light for two hours, illuminat-
ing up to twenty meters around the holder. If the 
guidance fins are extended first, the flare launches 
up to 200 meters and explodes in a bright white 
flash. A launched flare does 1d6 damage to anyone 
it hits, though the clumsy flight gives a -4 penalty 
on any attempts to hit something with it.
Trade goods: Glowbugs, ceramic fire lighters, anti -
biotics, ceraplast tools, and the other fruits of a 
TL4 civilization that might be valuable on more 
primitive worlds. A kilo of trade goods can usually 
be traded for at least a hundred credits worth of 
local products on more primitive worlds that are 
not well-served by interstellar merchants. The 
profit margin shrinks rapidly as interstellar trade 
becomes more common, and there is always the 
difficulty of finding local products that are actually 
worth a merchant’s journey.
Trade metals: The fruit of common TL4 asteroid min-
ing, trade metals include gold, platinum, artificial 
gemstones, and other substances precious on 
many lost worlds and trivially valuable on space -
faring ones. A kilo worth of trade metals can 
be exchanged for as much as a thousand credits 
worth of local products on metal-poor worlds iso-
lated from interstellar trade. Markets flood rapidly, 
however, and it usually doesn’t take more than a 
few merchant trips to persuade the locals to de -
mand trade goods or credits.
Vacc fresher: This three-kilo tube filters and compress-
es atmosphere to refill vacc suit oxygen tanks. It 
can extract oxygen from any atmosphere which 
contains it, even in the form of carbon dioxide. 
Refilling a standard vacc suit tank requires ten 
minutes of operation and consumes one type A 
power cell. Most vacc freshers are also equipped 
with an emergency hand crank power source, 
though it requires at least two hours of cranking.
Vacc suit: The standard TL4 vacc suit is designed to 
allow the wearer to survive in both hard vacu -
um and on most inhospitable planetary surfaces. 
The suit protects against ordinary levels of cosmic 
radiation and provides a temperature-controlled 
atmosphere. Vacc suits are equipped with radios 
that have a ten-kilometer range. A vacc suit ox -
ygen tank weighs 1 encumbrance, included with 
the weight of the suit, and functions for six hours.
 Vacc suits are cumbersome, and apply a -2 
penalty to all hit rolls and skill checks that re -
quire movement. Those with at least a month of 
zero-gee experience can ignore this penalty. No 
armor can be worn with a vacc suit, though the 
suit itself grants AC 13 to its wearers. A vacc suit 
requires one type A power cell for each twelve 
hours of operation. 
 Vacc suits have a self-healing exterior that 
can seal the puncture wounds caused by bullets, 
arrows, or energy beams, but a strike from an 
edged weapon can overwhelm the repair system. 
If a character with 10 or fewer hit points is struck 
by an edged weapon, there is a 50% chance the suit 
is torn. Suits are equipped with emergency repair 
patches, but it requires a Main Action to apply one. 
Exposure to vacuum is described on page 58.
Vacc skin: A more advanced TL5 version of the vacc 
suit, this skin-tight suit can be worn as a readied 
item in conjunction with armor, though it grants 
no Armor Class bonus itself. It requires no ox -
ygen tank, automatically cracking and recycling 
the wearer’s respiration, and can even recycle the 
wearer’s bodily waste into drinkable water if nec-
essary. Vacc skins apply no penalty to hit rolls or 
skill checks for wearers. It suffers tears in the same 
way as a normal vacc suit, and requires a type A 
power cell for each 24 hours of operation.
===== PAGE 81 =====
lifeStyleS, emPloyeeS, and ServiCeS •77 
Adventurers who spend much time in a place are likely 
to need to buy food, shelter, and the usual trifles of 
daily living. Rather than itemize each expense, a PC 
can simply spend an fixed amount for each day they 
spend living outside of a ship’s crew, barracks, or other 
arranged living situation.
Slum lifestyles reflect bare minimums for survival, 
with scanty food, a corner in a squat somewhere, and 
little else. Poor lifestyles involve barracks-like quarters, 
public transport, and small and infrequent luxuries. 
Common lifestyles usually allow for a private urban 
apartment or rural home, a rented personal vehicle, a 
respectable wardrobe, and regular small indulgences. 
Good lifestyles permit a private urban townhouse or 
similar dwelling, a spacious rural home, a better grade 
of personal vehicle, and the ability to indulge in minor 
expenses such as restaurants or clubs without concern. 
Elite lifestyles allow for entire floors of luxury buildings 
or rented rural estates, drivers and on-call gravflyers, 
personal staff, and similar perks. Peerless lifestyles are 
similar to that of pampered celebrities and oligarchs, 
with round-the-clock staff service, free entrance into 
the most exclusive locales, and the best of everything.
Prices given here assume short-term rentals and 
contracts, plus the inevitable premium charged to out-
siders in almost any society. Natives might be able to 
enjoy a given level of lifestyle for only half as much, 
but such savings usually rely on a local’s connections.
lIfesTyles, emPloyees, and serVICes
Lifestyle Cost/day
Slum 5
Poor 10
Common 15
Good 25
Elite 200
Peerless 1,000
Employee Wage/day
Artist 3/10/100
Programmer 10/30/100
Doctor 50/100/400
Guard 10/20/150
Lawyer 10/25/400
Prostitute 2/10/200
Psychic Special
Scientist 10/30/100
Technician 10/30/100
Unskilled Labor 2/8/15
Service Cost
Bribe, minor crime forgiveness 50
Bribe, major crime forgiveness 500
Bribe, capital crime forgiveness 5,000
Forged identity papers 500
Intensive medical care 200/day
Mail message, interstellar 1/hex
Mass transit weekly pass 2
Rent a TL4 workshop 100/day
Rent a groundcar 15/day
Starship passage, steerage 500/hex
Starship passage, good 1,000/hex
Starship cargo shipping, per kilo 25/hex
Wildly decadent party 100/person
PCs will sometimes need to hire help, and GMs occa -
sionally need to know what constitutes a “good wage” 
for a local NPC. The prices to the right reflect daily 
wages for NPCs with level-0, level-1, and level-2 skill 
ratings in their relevant professional skills. More tal -
ented employees cannot normally be obtained without 
special effort in finding and recruiting them.
Psychics are both rare and expensive to hire. Even 
if one can be found, they rarely charge less than 200 
credits per day per psychic skill level to be employed.
Employees will carry out ordinary duties without 
demur, but will be no braver or more dedicated than 
their pay and connections would make them.
Adventurers often need to obtain certain services or 
concessions from the locals, and the list to the right 
provides prices for some of their more common needs.
Bribe prices often vary depending on a planet’s 
general level of corruption, but the prices here are nor-
mal for most. Minor crimes usually involve anything 
that would only earn a fine or a few months in jail. 
Major crimes include most felonies and anything that 
would earn years in prison. Capital crimes are any that 
would get a culprit executed on the world. Particular -
ly blatant or sensitive offenses might be impossible to 
solve with mere bribery, though the right “special fa-
vors” to the right officials might win a reprieve.
Forged identity papers include high-quality docu-
mentation with the appropriate false database entries. 
They’re good enough to survive checkpoints and secu-
rity stops, but they won’t hold up to a serious check by 
a suspicious bureaucrat.
===== PAGE 82 =====
78• vehiCleS
VehICles
Most modern TL4 worlds rely on electrically-powered 
gravitic vehicles. Whether in the ubiquitous gravcar, 
hovercycle, or high-altitude gravflyer, cleared road -
ways carry the traffic of countless worlds. On rougher 
worlds, the roads may not even be paved, instead rely-
ing on a gravitic vehicle’s high clearance to avoid holes 
and rough debris.
Less sophisticated worlds are still reliant on inter-
nal-combustion engines. Many worlds have sufficient 
local resources to fabricate some kind of combustible 
fuel, but a few are so impoverished that they lack even 
this minimal resource. Such worlds must rely on mus-
cle power for transport, either that of alien beasts or 
humble human porters.
Vehicle Statistics and Combat
Vehicles are generally powered by type B power cells on 
TL4 worlds. More primitive planets are usually forced 
to use some form of biofuel unless they’re fortunate 
enough to have a supply of fossil fuels. Vehicles require 
one cell or one refueling per six hours of operation, 
assuming they don’t have convenient power access.
Vehicles are generally limited to reasonably flat, 
dry terrain. Grav vehicles such as hovercycles can ig -
nore rough terrain and calm water, as can ATV explor-
ers. Most grav vehicles can boost more than 10 meters 
above the ground or water; gravflyers are purpose-de-
signed aircraft capable of hovering and VTOL.
Speed is an abstract measure of the vehicle’s speed 
and agility. When vehicles chase each other, the op -
posing vehicle’s Speed should be applied as a penalty 
to Pilot skill checks to close or escape. Speed may also 
be used as a modifier when attempting difficult maneu-
vers or trying to avoid a peril on the road.
Armor is subtracted from all weapon damage done 
to the vehicle. Armor does not apply to damage done 
by Heavy weaponry; such guns are often designed to 
take out vehicles. Gravtanks in particular are immune 
to anything short of TL4 Heavy weapons, while less 
sophisticated tanks are immune to anything below TL3 
Heavy ordnance.
Actually hitting the vehicle is automatic if the 
vehicle is stationary and within 30 feet. Hitting a ve -
hicle-sized target from beyond that range requires an 
attack against AC 10. If the target is moving, subtract 
its Speed from the hit roll, and if the attacker is in a 
moving vehicle as well, also subtract their Speed.
Hit Points indicate the amount of damage a vehicle 
can take before it is destroyed. Speed is reduced by half 
when the vehicle is at half hit points, and flying vehicles 
must land at the first opportunity. A vehicle reduced to 
zero hit points forces all crew and passengers to make 
Physical saving throws. Failure means that the passen-
ger takes the vehicle’s maximum hit points in damage, 
while success reduces the damage by half.
Crew gives the maximum number of vehicle occu-
pants. For the listed vehicles, only one crew member is 
actually necessary to drive or pilot the vehicle, though 
additional crew members may be required to fire.
Tonnage is the shipping weight of the vehicle for 
ship loading purposes.
Tech Level indicates the minimum tech level for 
constructing the vehicle. Vehicles can be built at higher 
tech levels for better performance, but most worlds 
prefer to simply build more advanced vehicles.
Vehicle Weaponry
Most vehicles larger than a motorcycle or hovercycle 
can mount some kind of integral weapon. Groundcars 
and gravcars can mount one weapon, while ATVs, 
helicopters, atmoflyers, and gravflyers can mount two. 
Gravtanks are specialized weapons platforms, and can 
mount six.
Heavy weapons take up more space than ordinary 
ranged weapons, and each such system takes up the 
space of two lesser guns.
Every weapon requires its own gunner, and all 
mounted weapons use Shoot as the firing skill, though 
the GM might allow Pilot to be used for a nose-mount-
ed weapon aimed by the operator. Gravtanks are 
equipped with advanced targeting systems, and all of 
their weapons can be targeted and fired by one gunner.
Vehicle Cost Speed Armor HP Crew Tonnage TL
Motorcycle 1,000 1 4 10 1 1 3
Groundcar 5,000 0 6 30 5 10 3
Hovercycle 5,000 2 3 10 1 1 4
Gravcar 20,000 2 4 25 5 10 4
ATV Explorer 15,000 0 8 40 8 25 3
Helicopter 25,000 3 6 20 6 50 3
Atmoflyer 30,000 4 8 25 6 50 3
Gravflyer 40,000 5 8 25 6 50 4
Gravtank 200,000 2 Special 50 3 50 5
===== PAGE 83 =====
vehiCleS •79 
Types of Vehicles
Every world has its own brands of common vehicles, 
but the types below cover the more usual models. The 
prices given for each reflect a mid-range new vehicle 
sold to a PC with few local contacts. Natives who know 
the right people or are willing to buy used or “quirky” 
vehicles might be able to get one at half that price.
Motorcycles can navigate urban terrain that would 
block larger vehicles, but more rural landscapes can 
prove more difficult. Hovercycles are the TL4 equiva-
lent, capable of brief boosts of up to 10 meters above 
the ground and the easy navigation of all but thick for-
ests or sheer slopes.
Groundcars are the TL3 analogs of the vehicles 
commonly in use on 21st-century Earth, allowing for 
some minor variations in electronics and capabilities. 
Primitive buggies of various kinds are found even on 
higher-tech worlds, thanks to their ease of construction 
and maintenance compared to the delicate gravitics of 
more modern vehicles.
Gravcars are the standard personal vehicles of 
most TL4 worlds, though most lower-class citizens 
rely on public transport in urban areas. Most advanced 
worlds have planetary transit grids that allow occu -
pants to simply code in a destination and let the car take 
them there. On worlds where a lack of infrastructure 
or hostile local conditions preclude such convenience, 
manual controls and Pilot skill can be used.
ATV Explorers are rugged vehicles, either wheeled 
or tracked, and driven by type B power cells or local-
ly-available biofuels. While they can’t navigate rough 
terrain as easily as a grav vehicle, they’re designed 
to take a tremendous amount of punishment before 
breaking down and support repairs using basic tools 
and frontier expedients.
Helicopters are used on TL3 worlds where a lack 
of airfields or treacherous local terrain prohibits the 
use of fixed-wing craft. Their ability to hover over an 
area or drop onto a tightly-constrained landing zone 
makes them particular favorites of quick-response mili-
tary forces and groups in need of fast fire support. This 
model represents a medium-weight civilian craft that 
might be repurposed by militia or adventurers.
Atmoflyers are the fixed-wing aircraft used on 
planets too primitive to have developed gravitic tech -
nology. Faster and simpler to maintain than compara-
ble helicopters, they can also carry more cargo on most 
worlds. The need for clear, hard terrain for landing and 
take-off limit their use on some rugged worlds. The 
model here is meant to represent a small personal jet.
Gravflyers are the usual long-distance transport 
on most TL4 worlds. Large enough to support the gra-
vitics required for true flight, a few models can even 
reach low orbit. All can hover and climb with typical 
gravitic ease. This particular gravflyer is a small craft 
suitable for a affluent owner and their family.
Gravtanks make up the bulk of a prosperous TL4 
world’s armored forces. Private ownership is strictly 
forbidden on most worlds, but “export models” often 
can be acquired for transport offworld. Gravtanks have 
armor heavy enough to ignore all damage from con -
ventional small arms, and can only be harmed by Heavy 
weapons or properly-placed demolitions charges.
===== PAGE 84 =====
80• droneS
Drone Model Cost Fittings AC Enc HP Range TL
Primitive Drone 250 1 12 2 1 500 m 3
Void Hawk 5,000 4 14 6 15 100 km 4
Stalker 1,000 3 13 2 5 2 km 4
Cuttlefish 2,000 5 13 2 10 1 km 4
Ghostwalker 3,000 2 15 3 1 5 km 4
Sleeper 2,500 4 12 2 8 100 km 4
Pax 10,000 4 16 4 20 100 km 5
Alecto 50,000 4 18 4 30 5000 km 5
drones
In the far future, it’s often more convenient to send 
an expendable grav-flying probe into danger before 
venturing less repairable assets. Well-prepared adven-
turing groups often have reason to pack along a drone 
or two for exploring and aerial recon.
Military use of drones is limited by the ubiquitous 
use of quantum ECM. The easy confusion of electronic 
navigation makes it impossible to control an unwired 
drone remotely on a modern battlefield or in proximity 
to important civil structures, but in the alien wilds or 
away from urban centers, drones remain a feasible tool 
for explorers and conquerors of primitive militaries.
Piloting a Drone
Piloting a drone requires either a cybernetic drone con-
trol link as described on page 83 or a handheld control 
unit that comes with the drone. A control link can pilot 
up to one drone plus the user’s Program skill at any 
one time. Handheld units can pilot only one. Drones 
consume one type A power cell for every hour of use.
A pilot must spend their Main Action each round 
to command the drone to either move or shoot. Un -
commanded drones remain stationary if piloted via 
control link, while handheld units run a 2-in-6 chance 
of crashing a drone if the operator fails to control them.
In combat, drones fly at 30 meters per round on 
their pilot’s turn in combat. Out of combat, they can 
manage up to 100 kilometers per hour.
Spotting a drone at observation range is a Wis/
Notice skill check at difficulty 10. A drone close enough 
to engage a target can be spotted at difficulty 8. Any 
secure facility will have sensors capable of detecting 
a civilian drone as soon as it gets within observation 
range, unless the drone has stealth fittings.
Drone Combat
A drone’s pilot can activate up to one weapon the drone 
is carrying as part of their Main Action to control it 
each round. Weapons all use Intelligence as the con -
trolling attribute, and use the better of the pilot’s Pilot 
or Program skills as the relevant weapon skill. The 
drone shoots using the pilot’s base attack bonus.
Drone Types and Statistics
Each drone has a cost, a maximum number of fittings, 
an Encumbrance weight for carrying it along, a hit 
point rating, a maximum control range, and a mini -
mum tech level. Drones may be attacked as any other 
object and will crash once reduced to zero hit points.
Primitive drones represent the best flying portable 
drone technology for TL3 worlds. While fragile, weak, 
and short-ranged, they are also relatively cheap.
Void Hawks are unique in being built specifical -
ly for deep-space use. Unlike other drones, they can 
operate perfectly well in space, though they only have 
the range to reach relatively adjacent ships or objects.
Stalker drones are the default TL4 workhorses of 
drone-kind and are available on most modern worlds.
Cuttlefish are specifically designed for aqueous use, 
and function only in a liquid medium. The support of 
the liquid allows them to carry significantly more fit -
tings, but the need for a sonar-based navigation system 
limits their available range.
Ghostwalkers are stealth drones, fabricated from 
radar-transparent materials. They have an integral Sen-
sor Transparency fitting and the sensor difficulty to spot 
them is 11 instead of 9.
Sleeper drones are built to tarry on station for 
long periods. They have the Stationkeeping fitting as 
an integral part of their design, and when hovering 
their power use slows to a trickle. One day of hovering 
draws only five minutes worth of power from its cell.
Pax drones are some of the most common pretech 
drones remaining in existence, as they were favored by 
the Mandate Fleet for pacifying troublesome worlds 
that lacked quantum ECM. While primitive by pretech 
standards, they still far excel most modern drones.
The Alecto model of drone examples one way that 
pretech scientists attempted to sidestep the limits of 
quantum ECM on the modern battlefield. Every Alecto 
is a full-fledged VI, an expert system so sophisticated as 
to seem almost sentient. Its self-reinforcing cognition 
allows it to operate even when cut off from external 
signals by quantum ECM. Salvaged Alectos have all 
exhibited “female” personalities.
===== PAGE 85 =====
droneS •81 
Drone Fittings and Repair
Aside from the basic drone chassis, operators can attach 
different fittings to a drone to add additional capabili-
ties. Once attached, a fitting cannot be removed with -
out causing severe structural damage to the drone. If 
a drone is destroyed, all fittings are destroyed with it.
If a drone is damaged, it can be repaired fully with 
one unit of spare parts per five hit points lost and an 
hour’s work by someone with at least Fix-0 skill.
Ammo Unit: The drone carries one power cell or maga-
zine worth of ammunition for each of its onboard 
weapons, whether single or multiple. The oper -
ator can reload an ammo unit as a Main Action.
Bomber: The drone is fitted to drop up to two gre -
nade-sized explosives, one or both in lieu of a dif-
ferent weapon attack. Dropping a grenade from 
more than 30 meters up automatically causes the 
grenade to scatter from its intended target point.
Environmental Power: The drone draws operating 
power from sunlight or thermal variances. It can 
operate indefinitely so long as it can draw power 
from its environment.
Expert System: The drone is loaded with sophisticat -
ed self-piloting software. It can be given a flight 
plan by its operator, have targets designated for 
its weapon, and respond to simple environmental 
cues. Each new command takes up a Main Ac -
tion and commands with any conditional states 
may require an Int/Program skill check to get the 
drone to understand. The drone can fire only one 
weapon per round and uses a total attack bonus of 
+2 if attacking autonomously. Quantum ECM will 
scramble this lightweight system.
Extended Flight: The drone can now carry a second type 
A cell to fuel its flight. This fitting can be taken 
multiple times to further extend its range.
Grav Muffles: The drone is made exceptionally quiet in 
operation. It is now inaudible by ordinary hearing 
from more than five meters away.
Heavy Lift: While most drones can lift no more than 
a kilogram of excess weight, the drone’s gravitic 
units have been upgraded to carry up to twenty 
kilos of cargo. This can be fitted multiple times.
Holoskin: The drone can drop a filmy hologram over it-
self, one convincing at a distance. The difficulty of 
visually spotting the drone becomes 10 at weapons 
range or 12 at observational range. Weapons fire 
always draws attention.
Medical Support: The drone can be loaded with up to 
a dozen units of medication, whether stim doses, 
lazarus patches, or less benevolent substances. It 
can launch a medication through a remote injector 
at a target within ten meters in lieu of a weapon 
attack. Immobile or willing targets are hit auto -
matically, while hostiles require a normal hit roll. 
The drone is treated as having Heal-0 skill or the 
active pilot’s Heal skill, whichever is higher.
Observation Suite: All drones are wired for basic camera 
and sound, but this suite contains a full-spectrum 
UV/IR visual package, remote sound sensors, and 
radiation/chemical detectors. The drone can focus 
on conversations or facial expressions from up to 
2 kilometers away and can operate even in the 
complete absence of visible light.
Racing Gravitics: The drone is tuned for extra speed. Its 
flight endurance is halved, but it can now move 
up to 60 meters per combat round and fly at up to 
200 kph out of combat.
Reinforced Structure: The drone is equipped with 
heavier plating and a sturdier internal frame. Its 
hit points are increased by 50%, rounded up.
Sensor Transparency: The drone is sheathed in anti-ra-
dar composites. Ordinary sensors will not detect it 
at observation range, and high-end military sen -
sors can spot it only on an Int/Program check at 
difficulty 9.
Stationkeeping: The drone does not need to be con -
stantly controlled; when the operator does not 
spend a Main Action to pilot it, it simply remains 
stationary. If equipped with an Observation Suite , 
it can ping the operator if any anomalous reading 
is obtained.
Suicide Charge: The drone is loaded with a demo charge 
as per page 69. The operator can trigger it as an 
attack, but unless they can move the drone in by 
surprise, the approach will always give onlookers 
a chance to spot it before it gets within range.
Weapon Fitting: The drone can be mounted with 1 
encumbrance worth of ranged weaponry, which 
must be purchased separately. This fitting may be 
taken more than once to mount more weapons 
or heavier weapons. The weapon requires one or 
more ammo units to feed it.
Drone Fittings Cost TL
Ammo Unit 250 4
Bomber 500 3
Environmental Power 4,000 4
Expert System 5,000 4
Extended Flight 250 3
Grav Muffles 2,000 4
Heavy Lift 2,000 4
Holoskin 3,000 4
Medical Support 2,000 4
Observation Suite 250 3
Racing Gravitics 2,000 4
Reinforced Structure 1,000 4
Sensor Transparency 5,000 4
Stationkeeping 1,000 4
Suicide Charge 250 3
Weapon Fitting 1,000 4
===== PAGE 86 =====
82• CyberWare
CyberWare
Postech medical science and neural interface technol -
ogy are sophisticated enough to meld metal and flesh 
into a coherent whole. The creation of advanced cy -
berware is not beyond the theoretical capability of TL4 
societies, and pretech worlds can produce cyberware 
of such sophistication as to blur the lines between or-
ganism and artifice.
Yet cyberware is rarely available on most worlds, 
even those with the nominal technology level to sup -
port it. The advantages that cyberware can give a user 
are great, but the cost of building, fitting, and implant-
ing these devices is huge compared to simply buying a 
handheld device to do the same function. There are few 
buyers for a 15,000 credit ghost talker implant when a 
compad retails for a hundred credits.
The market that does exist is largely for those few 
elite operatives and dignitaries who are willing to pay 
exorbitant sums for the smallest advantage. Most cy -
berware is custom-built for its users, and it can be an 
adventure in itself to find a lab capable of manufac -
turing an augmentation and successfully implanting 
it. Some worlds have industrialized the production of 
cyberware, however, making it much cheaper and in 
much wider circulation. Even then, these worlds rarely 
export much cyberware due to the heavy infrastructure 
necessary to fit and implant the wares. Those who want 
the tech will have to find such planets and do their own 
negotiations there.
Aside from the difficulties of cost and scarcity, 
cyberware also taxes the wearer’s body. Each piece of 
cyberware comes with a System Strain cost as described 
on page 32, permanently adding that many points of 
System Strain to the user’s total. These points can never 
be lost unless the system is surgically removed. This 
permanent System Strain decreases the amount of 
psionic healing a character can sustain and can limit 
the effectiveness of healing and stimulant drugs.
Some cyberware has an activation cost in System 
Strain. If a cost would push the character’s System 
Strain above their Constitution score, they cannot 
trigger the cyberware; their body just can’t handle the 
strain until it has had time to recover.
Adrenal Suppression Pump: These endocrine pumps 
neutralize numerous brain chemicals in the user 
when activated while exciting the user’s percep -
tual centers. This combination produces a cold, 
dispassionate situational awareness that grants 
the user +2 on initiative rolls when the system is 
engaged. Most systems have built-in safety over -
rides to prevent psychological addiction and brain 
damage, allowing the unit to be used for no more 
than an hour each day. The user takes a -2 penalty 
on all social skill checks while the unit is active, 
and it requires five rounds to toggle it.
Bioadaptation Augments: These additional synthetic 
organs and filters allow the bearer to survive in 
thin-atmosphere conditions, as well as tolerate 
temperatures ranging from Antarctic chill to 
heat sufficient to boil water. They can also eat a 
wide range of native life forms for sustenance; no 
normal planet’s native biology is ever considered 
immiscible for consumption.
Body Arsenal Array: Some personnel need to be armed 
at all times without giving any indication of such. 
Improvised weaponry and conventional holdout 
weapons are useful enough against soft targets, 
but disabling a target in powered armor requires 
more. The details of the array vary from user to 
user, but usually act as advanced medium weapons 
that can be used with either Punch or Stab skills 
and at least one integral energy projector equal 
to a laser rifle, one that must be powered by an 
insertable type A power cell. Retracted body arse-
nals can be detected only by a medical examination.
Body Sculpting: Not so much a single implant as a se -
ries of complex surgeries, body sculpting is avail-
able on many TL4 worlds with fairly advanced 
medical services. After a week of alterations and 
treatments a subject’s external appearance can be 
set within any human or near-human range, in -
===== PAGE 87 =====
CyberWare •83 
Cyberware Cost Strain TL
Adrenal Suppression Pump 30,000 1 4 Eliminates emotion and improves initiative
Bioadaptation Augments 10,000 1 4 Survive near-habitable planetary conditions
Body Arsenal Array 10,000 1 4 Provides retractable body weaponry
Body Sculpting 10,000 1 4 Complete external physical reconstruction
Dermal Armor 20,000 2 4 AC 16, immune to primitive weapon Shock
Drone Control Link 20,000 1 4 Allows easier remote control of drones
Eelskin Capacitor Mesh 25,000 1 4 Allows bare-handed hacking and electrical shocks
Gecko Anchors 15,000 1 4 Can climb sheer surfaces as if they were flat
Ghost Talker Transceiver 15,000 1 4 Integral compad with audiovisual transmission
Holdout Cavity 10,000 1 4 Shielded body cavity for holdout storage
Holoskin Emitters 15,000 1 4 Creates a hologram around the user
Identity Submersion Trigger 25,000 1 4 Allows a false identity to be perfectly assumed
Immunofiltration System 25,000 2 4 Immune to almost all diseases and poisons
Induced Coma Trigger 20,000 1 4 Feigns death and halts bodily processes for up to two weeks
Neurointruder Alert 50,000 1 5 Grants +3 to save vs. telepathy, alerts of intrusion
Panspectral Optics 15,000 1 4 Integral low-light and thermal vision
Pressure Sheathing 15,000 1 4 Integral emergency vacc suit
Prosthetic Limb 2,500 1 4 Replaces a limb lost to misadventure
Revenant Wiring 50,000 3 5 Keeps the user fighting even after they’re dead
Slowtime Window 30,000 2 5 Prevents surprise and speeds up the user’s cogitation
Stabilization Overrides 25,000 2 4 Automatically stabilizes a mortally-wounded user
Tagger Nanites 15,000 1 4 Lets the user tag others with tracking nanites
Toxin Injector 20,000 2 4 Allows surprise injection of lethal or dazing toxins
Twitchlock Actuators 30,000 2 4 Allows brief moments of hyper-precise accuracy
cluding full retinal and fingerprint matching to a 
desired target. A TL5 version of this treatment 
that costs ten times as much can involve exten -
sive DNA reprogramming to change the subject 
at a genetic level, making their alterations herita -
ble and allowing female-targeted shapes to bear 
offspring. This TL5 treatment is not reversible, 
and any further major alterations to the subject 
require further permanent System Strain.
Dermal Armor: A fine subcutaneous reinforcement 
mesh provides significant protection against im -
pacts and cuts while remaining imperceptible to 
anything short of a medical examination. Some -
one with the implant has AC 16 and is immune 
to Shock damage inflicted by primitive melee 
weapons. A TL5 version of this implant that costs 
five times as much grants even more protection, 
rendering the subject wholly immune to primitive 
weapons as if they were wearing powered armor.
Drone Control Link: Most often found among military 
bot wranglers, civilians can also get a drone con-
trol link implanted to simplify the remote piloting 
of drones and other robotic units.
Users of a link can issue commands to a drone 
as a Move action instead of a Main Action. A 
single drone can only receive one command per 
round, however.
Aside from this ease of command, someone 
with an implanted rig can “look” through a piloted 
drone’s sensors as an Instant action, and a drone 
is never considered to be out of control even if 
the pilot doesn’t spend an action controlling it. A 
link can maintain a connection with one drone at 
a time, plus the user’s Program skill.
Eelskin Capacitor Mesh: A hair-fine mesh of almost im-
perceptible wiring along the user’s palms and fin-
gers allow them to trigger brief, controlled bursts 
of electrical energy at targets within five meters. 
As an Instant action it adds 2d4 non-lethal damage 
to a successful Punch attack. In its intended use, it 
also allows the user to override and disable most 
electronic locks and security systems with a suc -
cessful Sneak or Fix skill check. Both triggering a 
burst and hacking a security system tax the user’s 
biology; one System Strain point is gained with 
each attack or skill check.
Gecko Anchors: Miniaturized gravitic manipulators are 
embedded in the subject’s hands and feet as part 
of this complex surgery. While they are too weak 
to allow levitation or damping fall damage, they 
===== PAGE 88 =====
84• CyberWare
can twist localized gravity around those limbs to 
anchor the subject to the nearest surface capable 
of bearing their weight. As a result, the user can 
freely run or climb up or down sheer surfaces at 
their normal movement rate, carrying no more 
than their normal maximum encumbrance.
Ghost Talker Transceiver: Some people simply cannot 
afford to be out of contact at any time, under any 
circumstances. Those people find use for the mi-
crofine web of radio wiring and optical augmen-
tation that make up the ghost talker. These units 
act as a built-in compad for the user and allow 
for reception and transmission of audio and visual 
recordings, the latter playing in an inset window 
in the user’s field of vision. If the unit is operating 
outside of a standard comm grid, it has a trans -
mission range of twenty kilometers and a recep -
tion range of one hundred. Ghost talker users can 
transmit basic visual diagrams and images to each 
other, as well as optical recordings.
Holdout Cavity: Usually implanted somewhere in the 
torso, a holdout cavity is a small recess shaped 
into the wearer’s body and designed to be over -
looked by most standard forms of medical or se -
curity scanning. It automatically defeats a security 
inspection that uses less than TL4 scanners, and 
even advanced tech requires careful personal in -
spection to have a chance of revealing it. The cav-
ity can hold an object up to the size of a pistol and 
is opened and shut by the user’s mental command.
Holoskin Emitter: Multiple holographic emitters are im-
planted on the user, allowing them to alter their 
external appearance to match anything of their 
approximate size and dimensions, including oth -
er people. Shifting appearances is a Main Action, 
and the user can’t shift to an appearance that isn’t 
in the cyberware’s shape library. The library is vast 
and contains “generic” examples of numerous hu-
man-sized objects and people, but mimicking a 
specific other person requires at least five minutes 
of close examination. The holograms projected 
by the emitters are good, but imperfect; anyone 
who closely examines the user will be able to tell 
that something is artificial about their appearance, 
and touch instantly confirms any suspicions. The 
emitters can fake clothing and can produce sounds 
to complement the illusion or modify the user’s 
voice, if records of the true subject are available. 
The disguise lasts until the user dies or ends it.
Identity Submersion Trigger: This cyberware involves 
micronized neural stimulation technology which 
is imperceptible to anything short of TL5 medical 
scanning or TL4 surgical examination of the sub-
ject’s brain tissue. When active, the IST allows the 
subject to adopt a secondary persona, complete 
with a library of manufactured memories. So long 
as the IST is active, the subject will honestly and 
completely believe himself to be the secondary 
persona, a conviction that cannot be penetrated by 
telepathy or TL4 methods of interrogation. The 
persona can be activated at the user’s discretion, 
but it only deactivates on a preset trigger, leaving 
the subject in full possession of all memories expe-
rienced. The trigger can be any perceptible stimu-
lus: a particular time, the sight of a specific person, 
a code phrase, or any other sign, and it may be 
changed by the user each time they activate the 
cyberware. Many ISTs are also implanted with a 
“master key” that will automatically deactivate the 
triggered identity.
Immunofiltration Systems: This broad-spectrum scrub 
system carefully identifies and contains toxic sub-
stances introduced into the user’s system. When -
ever the subject would normally have to make a 
saving throw to resist some disease or toxin, they 
may instead gain one System Strain to automat -
ically succeed on the save. Most of these systems 
are calibrated to automatically filter any toxins 
or chemicals in standard use by police or military 
forces in the sector, but if presented with a spe -
cial biowarfare toxin, the filters are less effective. 
In such cases, the most it can do is either grant a 
second saving throw if the first is failed, or grant 
a single saving throw if none is normally allowed. 
Induced Coma Trigger: A series of implants are wired 
to the user’s brain stem, allowing them to trigger 
an induced therapeutic coma at a mental com -
mand. The user appears dead to anything short 
of a medical inspection, and has no need of respi -
ration, food, or water while the coma is in effect. 
The user does not heal while in a coma, but any 
diseases or poisons also halt progression. The user 
determines how long the coma is to last before 
triggering it, and is unconscious for its duration. 
A character can survive in a coma up to two weeks 
before needing to regain consciousness for as long 
as they were in the coma.
Neurointruder Alert: While somewhat primitive by 
pretech standards, this TL5 cybernetic implant 
allows the wearer to gain a +3 bonus on all saving 
throws to resist telepathic intrusion. Even if such 
a save is failed, the user will be aware that they 
are under telepathic assault, though some forms of 
mental control may not allow them to say as much 
until after the influence is ended. The warning 
does not indicate the source of the influence.
Panspectral Optics: Ocular adjustments to the wearer 
allow them to see clearly at any light level short of 
perfect darkness, in addition to giving them ther-
mal vision that can easily distinguish shapes and 
distance even in the total absence of light. Danger-
ous radiation and lasers tuned outside the range 
of visible light are also visible to the user. Nearby 
radio transmissions can be seen as if they were 
visual flares of color. The system cannot translate 
these transmissions, only alert the user to them.
===== PAGE 89 =====
CyberWare •85 
Pressure Sheathing: Occasionally purchased by work -
ers in hard vacuum or other hostile environments, 
pressure sheathing integrates an ultrathin pres -
sure membrane with the user’s dermis and emer-
gency film sealants that trigger at the user’s mental 
command. The pressure sheathing serves as an 
emergency vacc suit with an integral oxygen sup-
ply and temperature regulators that can sustain 
them for up to thirty minutes. A pressure sheath 
needs 48 hours to regain structural integrity and 
power after triggering. A pressure sheath can be 
detected only by a close medical examination.
Prosthetic Limb: Hands, feet, arms, legs, eyes, and 
numerous internal organs can be replicated by 
postech medical science. These prosthetics can 
provide a good approximation of the sense of 
touch, and are usually impossible to distinguish 
from ordinary limbs without close inspection. 
Pretech-level worlds tend to prefer actually re -
generating lost limbs, but those with access only 
to ordinary frontier levels of tech have reason to 
be grateful to prosthetics.
Revenant Wiring: One of the more grotesque results of 
late pretech augmentation research, revenant wir-
ing permeates the user’s body with a web of sup -
plementary limb actuators and sensor clusters. In 
combat, the user may designate up to a half-dozen 
targets to the system’s braked micro-AI. If the user 
goes unconscious or is killed, the micro-AI will 
engage the limb actuators to keep fighting, even 
if the user is nothing more than a ragged mass 
of mangled tissue. The micro-AI is not brilliant, 
but it is capable of negotiating most terrain and 
dealing with physical impediments to killing the 
designated targets. The actuators have power to 
keep operating for 3d4 rounds, or until the wear-
er takes 25 more hit points of damage, whichev -
er comes first. The stress produced by revenant 
wiring makes it much more difficult to revive a 
downed user with Lazarus patches or biopsionics; 
all revivification chances are half normal.
Slowtime Window: A piece of cutting-edge pretech cy-
berware, the slowtime window was installed in 
crisis responders and others reliant on split-sec -
ond decision making. When engaged, the implants 
accelerate the user’s cogitation speed by more than 
three thousand percent. While there is no corre-
sponding acceleration of the user’s physical reflex-
es, they have time to process the situation and take 
in its details. A person who triggers a slowtime 
window cannot be surprised; they always roll ini-
tiative as normal no matter how unexpected the 
attacker. This brain acceleration is highly stressful 
on the tissues, however, and one point of System 
Strain is gained each time it is engaged.
Stabilization Overrides: An intricate interweaving of 
microcapillaries and backup organs is implanted 
in the subject’s torso and spinal column. These 
overrides can stabilize the user when severe phys-
ical trauma would otherwise kill them. A user re-
duced to 0 hit points is automatically stabilized, 
as if a Lazarus patch had been successfully applied 
to them, assuming that a patch could have saved 
them. Stabilization overrides tend to interfere 
with the ordinary operation of the user’s organs, 
however, and the wearer’s Constitution modifier 
is lowered by 1, with all the attendant consequenc-
es in loss of maximum hit points.
Tagger Nanites: While true nanotechnology is beyond 
the grasp of standard TL4 science, this cyber al -
lows for the implantation of very simple nanofac-
tories in the user, ones that exude a constant im-
perceptible “smart dust”. Objects the user touches 
can be tagged by these nanites, which generate 
more of their kind for up to 48 hours after tagging. 
The dust then lays down a trail behind the tagged 
object, one that is visible to the user or to some-
one using a properly-keyed tracer. Only count -
er-nanite measures can remove the dust, as ordi-
nary bathing or scrubbing is insufficient. The dust 
can be pinged by radio to announce its location 
to anyone within five kilometers, but most users 
prefer to leave the dust in passive mode, where it 
is undetectable to most TL4 sensors. Tagging an 
object adds one System Strain to the user.
Toxin Injector: The user’s canines or fingernails are 
altered to allow for the injection of one of two 
types of poison. If the user attempts to inject an 
unsuspecting victim they are already touching, the 
attempt is automatically successful. If the victim is 
wary or in combat, they can only be affected if they 
are unarmored and the user succeeds in a Punch 
attack roll. On a success, the victim must make a 
Physical saving throw at -2 or be incapacitated by 
the poison, dying in 1d6 rounds or being incapac-
itated for 1d6 hours at the user’s discretion. Each 
poison attack adds 2 System Strain to the user.
Twitchlock Actuators: Neural override fibers are wo -
ven into the user’s hands and arms and linked to a 
perceptual modulator implanted at the base of the 
user’s brain stem. When presented with a direct 
exercise of hand-eye coordination, the twitchlock 
can be engaged to produce superhuman accuracy 
and precision. Any attack roll or skill check reliant 
chiefly on manual dexterity or aim can be rerolled, 
though the power surge inflicts two points of Sys-
tem Strain on the user. A given roll can only be re-
rolled once with this cyberware. While the twitch-
lock allows superhuman accuracy when engaged, 
the overrides fuzz ordinary nerve impulses and 
reduce the user’s Dexterity modifier by 1 when 
active. Activating or deactivating the cyberware 
requires a Main Action.
===== PAGE 90 =====
86• artifaCtS
arTIfaCTs
Pretech artifacts are some of the more precious loot 
available from lost Mandate military bases, abandoned 
colonies, desolate tomb worlds, and forgotten research 
outposts. Most pretech on modern worlds was long 
ago cannibalized for vital spare parts or destroyed by 
the ravages of time and violence. The few pieces that 
remain are almost always extremely valuable.
Very few pretech artifacts are bought or sold. 
Some items are relatively common, having been ubiq -
uitous enough to survive in large numbers or simple 
enough to be produced by a few remaining modern 
worlds. Most artifacts, however, are so rare that there 
is no consistent market for them; an owner can charge 
what they wish for a device.
Getting that price is a different matter. Few plan-
etary governments allow private ownership of “dan -
gerous pretech artifacts”, and it’s the government that 
decides what constitutes danger. Most owners are rap-
idly visited by firm, polite agents with heavily-armed 
backup and given a “fair price” for their find.
As a consequence, most trade in pretech artifacts 
has to take place on the black market, or on worlds or 
stations too lax to care about who might be bringing 
in a portable black hole generator that just happens 
to look like a Mandate child’s toy. Such venues rarely 
provide much in the way of security or contract en -
forcement, and so trade has to take place amid grasping 
guards, paranoid participants, and regular theft.
Pretech artifacts are more often traded privately 
as rewards, mission payments, or exchanges between 
owners. A PC who wants to obtain one of the artifacts 
listed in this section will need to not only find someone 
who will admit to possessing the gear, but also find out 
what kind of favor they’re going to need to part with it. 
Tens of thousands of credits can sometimes do the trick, 
but most owners will prefer to wring the maximum 
utility out of a capable adventurer’s interest in their 
prized possessions.
Artifact Armor
Many types of pretech armor are so rare or useful that 
they cannot normally be acquired on the open market. 
Much like artifact weaponry, these artifact armors are 
jealously held by those lucky enough to find them.
Executive Security Suit: This suit of stylish pretech 
clothing can self-modify in one minute to appear 
as any normal suit of clothing and grants AC 15 
to the wearer. Originally designed for VIP pro -
tection, the executive security suit automatically 
stabilizes a mortally-wounded wearer provided 
they haven’t taken enough damage to make reviv-
al impossible. Like the majority of pretech artifact 
armor, the suit is so light that it does not add to 
the wearer’s encumbrance.
Ghost Mantle: Designed for use by elite infiltrators, a 
ghost mantle can warp light around the wearer to 
blur his or her outlines and coloring to match the 
surroundings. The mantle can self-modify in one 
minute to appear as any normal suit of clothing 
and grants AC 15 to the wearer. When used in 
stealth mode, it grants a +2 bonus to all Stealth-re-
lated skill checks. TL4 sensors and scanners cannot 
detect the mantle as anything but ordinary cloth.
Polyplast Carapace: This variant form of assault suit 
employs pretech deforming polymers to create 
sealed joints and flexible armor plates that still 
maintain rigidity under impact. A polyplast cara-
pace is treated as an assault suit with AC 18, except 
that it counts as only one item for encumbrance 
and requires no practice to use correctly. Integral 
kinetic absorption sinks allow the armor to func-
tion without the need for power cells.
Psitech Combat Suit: One of the rare psitech artifacts 
originally designed for use by military combat 
psychics, this snug-fitting armored undersuit 
grants the wearer an AC of 16. Its special ability 
functions only for psychics; it can allow the user 
to reflexively fuel the suit’s defenses with their 
own psychic reserves. As an Instant action, they 
can Commit Effort for the day to negate up to 
15 points of damage from in incoming source of 
physical injury. Each time they do this, they must 
make a Mental saving throw or the psychic con-
version shock leaves them unable to use psionic 
techniques until after the end of their next turn.
Stutterjump Suit: A modified version of the standard 
deflector array, a stutterjump suit grants the wear-
er a limited form of teleportation through integral 
psitech circuitry. As an Instant action, the wearer 
can teleport to any location within one hundred 
meters, provided they have an unobstructed line 
of sight to it. The suit’s circuitry requires twelve 
hours to recover enough for another jump. The 
suit does not require power cells to function.
Titan Powered Armor: An enormously heavy suit of ser-
vo-actuated powered armor, Titan assault plate 
was favored by pretech boarding parties and space 
marines. It grants the wearer all the usual benefits 
of storm armor, but has a base AC of 21 and sub-
tracts 2 points of damage from every instance of 
harm suffered by the wearer.
Tempest Assault Array: A modified version of the field 
emitter panoply, the TAA has all the functionality 
of the FEP but also does an automatic 1d6 dam -
age to anyone who attacks the wearer in melee, 
inflicting the damage after the attack is resolved. 
The wearer is immune to Shock damage. Kinetic 
sinks allow the TAA to function without the need 
for power cells.
===== PAGE 91 =====
artifaCtS •87 
Artifact Weaponry
While generic pretech weaponry is of superb quality 
and manufacture, some pieces exceed even the custom-
ary excellence of the ancients. These “artifact” weap -
ons are usually the product of short production runs 
by master pretech craftsmen or individually-designed 
masterpieces. Some pre-Scream manufacturers retain 
fame even centuries later for the unique quality of their 
workmanship.
Artifact weapons are almost never found on the 
market. The few pieces that are found and offered for 
sale are snapped up almost immediately by elite opera-
tives and others who rely on the quality of their hard-
ware to preserve their own lives. Most who have arti -
fact weaponry have either found it in a long-abandoned 
pretech cache, received it from a superior, or taken it 
from the cold hands of a former owner. Selling such a 
weapon tends to be equally difficult, with buyers few 
and untrustworthy.
Absolution Armaments: A company specializing in ener-
gy weaponry, AA pioneered several techniques for 
increasing the energy efficiency and penetrating 
power of their armaments. AA laser weapons ig-
nore particulate matter when shooting, and all AA 
weapons gain +1 to hit and +2 damage.
Colonial Arms: An armaments company dating from 
the First Wave of human colonization, Colonial 
Arms was famous for the incredible durability 
and versatility of their firearms. Their guns were 
largely self-repairing from anything short of hav-
ing pieces torn off, and their projectile weapons 
automatically self-adjusted to fire whatever am -
munition was available, in any environment from 
hard vacuum to underwater operations. A Colo -
nial Arms projectile or energy weapon also gains 
a +1 bonus to hit and damage rolls.
Convergence Weaponry: Those weapons designed by 
the transhuman hive-mind polity known as the 
Convergence are almost always energy-based guns 
found in sets of 2-5 matching weapons. Wielders 
can nominate a target as an Instant action at the 
start of each round; any attacks they make with 
the weapon against that target get a +1 hit and 
damage bonus for each wielder that targeted the 
foe, including their own nomination.
Imperial Arms: Ornate and beautiful weapons created 
shortly after the horror of the Scream, these arms 
were developed by an unknown pocket empire 
that somehow preserved a little of their pretech 
manufacturing base. Their attempt to reimpose 
order on the chaos around them appears to have 
failed, but their legacy lingers in the scattered 
weapons that remain from their far-flung armies. 
An Imperial weapon grants its user a +1 bonus 
to all hit and damage rolls, with projectile weap-
ons having an unlimited supply of ammo. These 
weapons always remain immaculately clean.
===== PAGE 92 =====
88• artifaCtS
Fiat Lux: This manufacturer specialized in laser and 
plasma weaponry. Their products were largely 
conventional in function, but the quality of crafts-
manship was seldom surpassed. Fiat Lux weapon-
ry grants +2 to hit rolls and damage.
Nightfall Combine: The exact nature of the Nightfall 
Combine was unclear even before the Scream, 
with rumors of alien xenotech manufacturing 
techniques and esoteric psitech materials research. 
The weapons produced by the Combine were 
some of the finest ever developed by humanity. 
They grant +3 to all hit and damage rolls.
Omnipresence, Ltd.: A pretech manufacturer who spe-
cialized in holdout weaponry, Omnipresence arms 
are composed of special polymorphic nano-com -
pounds that are capable of shifting shape in mo -
ments. Omnipresence weaponry can take a single 
alternate shape of the same mass set during man -
ufacture, usually a belt, necklace, or other seem -
ingly innocuous object. When gripped and a short 
keycode is spoken, the item instantly shifts forms, 
containing whatever ammunition it was original-
ly loaded with. Shifted Omnipresence weapons 
cannot be detected by any postech means; even 
a pretech scanner will only reveal that the object 
is composed of complex nanites. Omnipresence 
weapons grant +1 to hit and damage rolls.
PolyGaia Defense: Originally an organization of mili -
tant pan-planetary animists, PolyGaia armaments 
function perfectly in almost any environment. 
Projectile and energy weapons are also equipped 
with integral monoblades, and can be used as ad-
vanced medium melee weapons without a need to 
club the weapon. PolyGaia weaponry grants +1 to 
hit and damage rolls.
SamaelTech: The Sons of Samael were one of the myr -
iad peculiar religious and ideological groups that 
flourished during the Second Wave of human 
expansion. While their exact beliefs are unclear 
at this distance, their surviving melee armament 
is invariably superb. Monoblades, kinesis wraps, 
and other such SamaelTech weaponry all have +1 
to hit and +1 damage. Some SamaelTech weap -
ons appear to be decorated with Christian ico -
nography and advanced nanotech cutting surfaces. 
These pieces grant +2 to hit and damage.
Stardust Micropellet System: The “Stardust” system was 
a cutting-edge effort to use gravitic manipulation 
techniques in projectile weaponry. By giving a 
tiny flake of matter the mass profile of a bullet, a 
Stardust weapon never runs out of ammunition, 
albeit Stardust weaponry cannot burst fire. Star-
dust weaponry gains +1 on all hit and damage rolls.
Tempus Fugit: The weapons of the Tempus Fugit ar -
mory employed Mandate temporal acceleration 
generators. Such acceleration is exhausting to 
the user, however, and creates severe strain on 
a normal biological system. As an Instant action, 
a wielder with the weapon in hand can take an 
additional full round of action any time they 
wish. At the end of this bonus action, they suffer 
1d4 System Strain, +1 for each use of this ability 
within the past 24 hours. If their System Strain is 
maximized by this, they fall unconscious for one 
hour. Tempus Fugit weapons have a +1 bonus to 
hit and damage.
Terminus Est: A sister-company to Tempus Fugit, the 
Terminus Est line of advanced melee weaponry 
employed spatial distortion technology. As an 
Instant action at the start of a round, a wielder 
with the weapon in hand can nominate a visible 
target; for the rest of the round, they’re treated as 
if they’re adjacent and engaged in melee combat 
with the target, hindering ranged attacks, subject-
ing them to attacks if they move away without a 
fighting withdrawal, and so forth. The wielder is 
not subject to attacks by the target unless they ac-
tually are within range of the target’s weapons. By 
straining the wielder’s perception pathways, this 
target nomination can be applied to a number of 
targets equal to the wielder’s Stab skill plus two. 
Any attack made against one target is applied to all 
nominated targets, using the same die rolls. Each 
round this multiple nomination is maintained, the 
wielder takes 2 System Strain. All Terminus Est 
weapons have a +2 bonus to hit and damage rolls.
Tools of Ill Omen: A specialist weapon line designed by 
sage-engineers affiliated with the Preceptors of 
the Great Archive, the Tools are decorated with 
taotie-motif fittings similar to those of Shang 
Dynasty bronzes. Tools usually appear as melee 
weapons, particularly halberds, dagger-axes and 
swords, though stylized hypervelocity repeating 
crossbows have been found that work like mag 
rifles with unlimited ammo. The Tools function 
with a +2 hit and damage bonus
Valiance Arms: Somewhat stodgy by pretech standards, 
Valiance never embraced the more exotic poten-
tials of pretech science. The company instead 
preferred to focus on precision low-recoil pro
-
jectile weapons and high-quality craftsmanship. 
Valiance projectile weapons grant +2 to hit and 
damage rolls.
Windcutter: Windcutter armaments are invariably 
edged melee weapons. Their pretech manufactur-
ers had an obsessive interest in maximizing weap-
on penetration, one carried to an extent that was 
very impressive, if perhaps somewhat impractical 
for field use. A Windcutter blade can slice through 
any substance short of advanced pretech armor 
plating, inflicting full normal damage on vehicles, 
including gravtanks or other targets subject only 
to Heavy weapons. For Shock purposes, all tar -
gets are treated as if they were AC 10. Against all 
targets, the blades have an effective +1 bonus to 
hit and damage.
===== PAGE 93 =====
artifaCtS •89 
Artifact Equipment
AI Companion: True AI was never easily made by pre-
tech scientists. AIs required individual care during 
their development, and a disturbing percentage of 
them had to be “braked” at sub-human levels in 
order to prevent runaway cogitation on impon -
derable philosophical questions and the ensuing 
metastatic insanity that followed. Some AIs man -
aged to attain a human level of sentience before 
requiring brakes. The less brilliant of these AIs 
could be contained in hardware no larger than five 
or six centimeters on a side, usually with integral 
sensors and vocalization units. If an AI companion 
takes a liking to a PC, they can be useful allies; they 
all have effective Program and Fix skills at level 3 
or greater, and may have additional capabilities. 
A distressing number of these AIs have their own 
purposes, however, that are not necessarily com-
plementary to those of their “owners”.
Integrity Stims: Usually found in the form of a skin -
spray applicator, integrity stims restore 2d6+2 hit 
points to a subject for each dose applied. Each dose 
increases the target’s System Strain by 1 point, and 
the stims are useless to those with maximized Sys-
tem Strain. More than one dose can be triggered 
into a subject in one round, but each dose after the 
first adds an additional second System Strain point 
from the sudden overload of stimulants.
Juggernaut Stims: Originally designed for pretech shock 
troops, this skinspray stimulant charges the user 
with fearless aggression and indifference to pain. 
The user immediately gains 3d6 temporary hit 
points and +2 to hit for a period of ten rounds. At 
the end of that period, any remaining temporary 
hit points are lost, and the subject suffers -2 to hit 
for the next hour as their system recovers. Use of 
this stim adds 1 point of System Strain.
Micropurgator Stims: A sprayhypo laden with a revivi-
fying cocktail of nanites and support chemicals, a 
micropurgator stim will remove 1d4 points of ac-
crued System Strain from the user. Only one such 
stim can be applied to a person within 24 hours.
Mindwall Helmet: A transparent-visored helmet, this 
headpiece strengthens the integrity of the wearer’s 
neural patterns, making it more difficult for them 
to be influenced by mind-affecting psionic powers. 
The wearer gains a +2 saving throw against any 
such attack, and is automatically alerted by the 
helmet if made the target of a telepathic power. 
The helmet does not help against purely physical 
psionic attacks, such as through telekinetics, and 
it cannot be worn with powered armor, vacc suits, 
or an assault suit.
Polymorphic Nanites: Usually found in two-kilo cyl -
inders with integral input-output data ports, 
polymorphic nanites were a late-Second Wave 
development that promised to revolutionize 
manufacturing. When fed a design schematic us -
ing standard pretech CAD/CAM protocols, the 
nanites exude into the desired object, mimicking 
any necessary physical properties. The nanites can 
be used to create any object of equivalent or less -
er mass, provided a datapad or the equivalent is 
available to feed them the schematic. The nanites 
are single-use, but multiple cylinders can be linked 
together to create larger objects. The workman -
ship of the nanites is good, but not exceptional; 
any available schematic of tech level 4 or less can 
be produced.
Pseudonuke: While conventional TL4 nuke snuffers 
make dangerous nuclear reactions impossible 
near spaceships or modern civil defense systems, 
a pseudonuke is designed with esoteric pretech 
parts and techniques to bypass TL4 defenses. Most 
pseudonukes are no larger than a briefcase but can 
detonate with enough force to wipe out a large 
city or space station. The handful created before 
the Scream were deniable Mandate tools to deal 
with rebel frontier colonies. Those that survive 
are spectacularly illegal on almost all worlds.
Redivivus Sheath: When found, a redivivus sheath re -
sembles a tightly-rolled body bag with a fist-sized 
computing module affixed to it. When a fresh -
ly-dead human body is sealed into the bag the 
module releases a cloud of nanites to repair and 
revive the subject. Revivification will work on any 
victim no more than five minutes dead, assuming 
the head is intact and most of their mass is present. 
Subjects are revived in critically wounded condi-
tion with maximized System Strain. The redivivus 
sheath functions only once before burning out.
System Reset Inductor: An array of pretech pharmaceu-
ticals of truly heroic breadth, a sprayhypo full of 
system reset inductor is one of the most powerful 
concoctions ever devised by pretech biochemists. 
On injection, the subject immediately loses all ac-
crued System Strain points barring those perma-
nently added by cyberware. The user can gain new 
System Strain normally, but 48 hours after the in-
ductor has been administered, the strain will catch 
up with them. They fall immediately unconscious 
with 1 hit point and maximized System Strain, and 
will remain in a coma for 48 hours before awaken-
ing. Use of a second inductor before the first has 
run its course will inevitably kill the subject within 
five rounds of application, with no hope of revival 
by psionic disciplines or conventional medical aid.
Wideawake Serum: Originally designed to facilitate 
spike drills for single-man ships that couldn’t af-
ford a sleeping pilot, wideawake serum gives the 
user enormous vigor and alertness for up to seven 
days at a time. The user need not sleep or even rest, 
but during this time it is impossible to recover 
accrued System Strain. A successful Heal check at 
difficulty 10, made at most once per day, can flush 
the drug from the user prematurely.
===== PAGE 94 =====
90• modding and building eQuiPment
moddIng and buIldIng equIPmenT
While truly sophisticated research and design often 
requires resources beyond the reach of an adventuring 
party, more modest workshops can allow a talented 
technician with a healthy supply of after-market parts 
to improve the quality of their own or their allies’ gear. 
Without a full-fledged R&D department behind them, 
a PC technician is generally limited to modifying and 
improving existing gear.
A mod is an adjustment made to a specific piece 
of tech to make it work better. These mods are finicky, 
delicate, and often customized to the user. They aren’t 
generally available on the market because they require 
regular tuning and adjustment by a highly-skilled tech-
nician in order to keep them from degrading, or even 
failing entirely. Mods require costly after-market parts 
that can be expensive to acquire, and the most sophisti-
cated ones require actual pretech salvage stripped from 
advanced ancient technology. Normally, only TL4 gear 
can be effectively modded, as more primitive tech isn’t 
suitable for the advanced components involved.
Installing Mods
Building and installing a mod requires a well-equipped 
TL4 workshop. It’s not necessary to have a full-fledged 
fabrication plant, but the sort of resources that a pro-
fessional repair tech or vehicle shop have are necessary 
to assemble and adjust the tech. Such a shop can usually 
be rented for 100 credits a day, or bought outright in a 
city or other urban area for 25,000 credits. A starship’s 
“Workshop” ship fitting will also qualify.
Mods have a minimum Fix skill required to install 
or maintain them; a Customized mod requires Fix-1, for 
example, while a Flexible mod takes Fix-2. Without this 
skill level, the tech can’t build or install the mod, and 
they can’t maintain it properly either.
Mods have a cost in credits or salvage. A tech with 
access to a normal TL4 parts market can buy compo-
nents with a credit cost, but certain highly sophisticated 
mods require pretech components that can only be sal-
vaged from certain ancient Mandate-era technological 
devices. Not just any device will do for gathering these 
components; these micronized fusion taps, antigrav 
nodules, impact flexors, and polymorphic state con -
trollers are found in only certain Mandate tech or in 
rare ancient caches of unused components. A tech will 
usually have to find these components as part of an 
adventure, because those who have them need them 
for their own purposes and will not part with them for 
ordinary monetary compensation. The specific details 
of these parts don’t matter for mod use, and they’re sim-
ply tracked as “salvage”. If a mod requires three units of 
salvage, any three units will work, and it’s not normally 
necessary for a tech to track down specific components.
Mods take time to build and install. It takes one 
week per minimum skill level of the mod to build and 
install it in the desired device. Thus, a Customized mod 
takes a week to put in, while a Flexible mod takes two. 
If a tech does nothing other than work, eat, and sleep, 
they can halve these times, and an additional assistant 
with at least Fix-0 skill can further halve the time.
Mods must be custom-built to specific objects. A 
tech cannot build a “generic” mod and then just attach 
it to a device; it must be carefully designed to fit exact-
ly with that specific item, and sometimes even with a 
specific user.
Mods and Maintenance
Mods require maintenance to keep functioning cor -
rectly. Overclocked hardware, bleeding-edge tech, and 
experimental adjustments just don’t have the field dura-
bility of more standard gear, so a tech must apply daily 
attention to the modded hardware if it’s not to fail. A 
normal TL4 toolbox is required to maintain mods, but 
no special parts are needed.
A tech’s Maintenance score is equal to the total of 
their Intelligence and Constitution modifiers plus three 
times their Fix skill level. The smarter and the longer a 
tech can work, the more maintenance they can perform, 
but their overall expertise as a technician is the most 
crucial element. A tech can maintain a number of mods 
equal to their Maintenance score without cutting into 
their adventuring time or otherwise encumbering their 
off-duty hours. This maintenance is assumed to take 
place during downtime and doesn’t need to be tracked 
specifically in play. If they do nothing but maintenance, 
they can double their score, but this kind of dedication 
requires sixteen-hour workdays.
If a mod goes without maintenance for 24 hours, it 
stops working. If a mod goes without maintenance for 
a week, the entire device it’s attached to stops working, 
as the untuned mod has made it useless or dangerous to 
use. Weapons can no longer be used in combat, armor 
no longer gives protection, seizes up, or is too danger-
ous to wear, and other devices simply stop functioning. 
A maintenance backlog on a device can be cleared by an 
hour of work by a technician capable of maintaining it.
Building Conventional Gear
Sometimes a wrench jockey will want to build their 
own equipment rather than purchase it off the shelf. 
This may be because there’s no such gear for sale, the 
equipment is illegal on this world, the tech wants it 
cheaper than the vendors sell it, or the tech wants 
to build a custom platform for their favorite mods. 
The gear built this way must be feasible to create in a 
workshop; guns, armor, and modestly-sized vehicles 
are possible, but starship components and other major 
constructions are not.
A tech requires a TL4 workshop to build most TL4 
equipment. More primitive gear can be built with less 
===== PAGE 95 =====
modding and building eQuiPment •91 
elaborate resources at the GM’s discretion. The work-
shop must be at least nominally capable of working with 
the kind of gear the tech is building. A vehicle repair 
shop will not have the tools to brew pharmaceuticals, 
and a back-room electronics shop won’t have the lifts 
to work on armored vehicles. If the tech needs to refit a 
workshop to work on a particular type of unsupported 
gear, they can pay half the shop’s original price to get 
the needed tools. Starships with Workshop fittings are 
always sufficient for personal gear modifications.
The tech needs a supply of parts. In any TL4 city 
or sizable community, the tech can scrounge, barter, 
or buy what they need from the locals. A tech working 
in a shop out in the wilds can prepare by taking a few 
footlockers full of materials that can fit in a vehicle or 
on pack animals, buying a certain number of credits 
worth of spare parts and hauling them along. Techs in 
dire need can strip ancient high-tech ruins, battlefields, 
and scrap heaps for parts if no better source is available.
Techs must decide whether the device they’re 
building is to be jury-rigged, normal, or mastercrafted. 
Jury-rigged devices are assembled out of cheap scrap, 
bottom-tier components, and makeshift kludges. 
They’re much cheaper to make than to buy, but they re-
quire constant attention to keep them operating. Nor-
mal devices work just as well as anything that you’d buy 
off the shelf, but the lack of economies of scale and the 
need to acquire all the parts at retail make them more 
expensive than buying it off the shelf. Mastercrafted 
gear is carefully built to support a tech’s own innova -
tions and favorite modifications. They are extremely 
expensive, but much easier to mod and maintain than 
off-the-shelf tech.
Building the gear usually takes one month for a 
vehicle and one week for a weapon, suit of armor, or 
other portable device. Having at least one assistant with 
Fix-0 will halve this time.
Jury-rigged devices cost one-quarter as much as 
the normal device and take half the normal time to 
build. If the tech has access to scrap or salvage, they 
can assemble it at no cost, but it takes twice the normal 
time to build it. A jury-rigged device counts as a mod 
requiring Fix-0 to maintain. If it goes 24 hours with -
out maintenance, it stops working. Jury-rigged devices 
cannot be modded.
Normal devices cost twice as much as they would 
off-the-shelf and take the normal amount of time to 
build. They cannot be built with scrap or salvaged parts 
unless the GM decides that the salvage is perfectly suit-
ed for this use. Drugs and other consumable goods must 
be built as normal devices rather than jury-rigged or 
mastercrafted ones.
Mastercrafted devices require costly premade 
components and cost ten times as much as the normal 
device, and require twice as much time to build. They 
are ideal platforms for the tech’s own modifications, 
however, and the first mod installed in the device re-
quires no maintenance.
Sample Mods
The mods listed below are simply a sample of those a 
GM might approve for their campaign. Weapon and 
armor mods should not stack beyond a +3 bonus to AC, 
hit rolls or damage rolls, and any mod improving a skill 
check shouldn’t boost it by more than +1. A mod can 
only be installed once on any given piece of equipment.
Autotargeting (Fix-2): The weapon has had micronized 
kinetic targeting aids installed, granting a +1 bo-
nus to hit rolls with it. Costs 4,000 credits.
Boosted (Fix-2): The weapon has been tuned for greater 
damage output, adding +2 to the damage it does. 
Costs 2,000 credits.
Bubbleseal (Fix-1): The armor is equipped with auto -
matic pressure seals and emergency oxygen. It can 
be triggered manually or activates automatically 
on exposure to low pressure, functioning as a vacc 
suit for up to one hour. Costs 5,000 credits.
Concealed (Fix-2): The device is disguised as a specific 
different object of the same general mass. This 
disguise will fool standard TL4 sensors, but not a 
close physical inspection of the object. Costs ten 
times the device’s base cost.
Customized (Fix-1): The weapon or armor has been 
carefully tailored to a single specific user. When 
used by that person, they get a +1 to hit with the 
weapon or a +1 Armor Class bonus with armor. 
Costs 1,000 credits and is inapplicable to shields.
Extended Magazine (Fix-1): The firearm has been ad -
justed so that its magazine size is doubled. Costs 
500 credits.
Flexible (Fix-2): The armor is carefully tailored to a 
specific wearer with an eye towards reducing its 
weight and cumbersomeness. Its Encumbrance 
value is lowered by 1 for that wearer, and in -
creased by 1 for anyone else. Costs 5,000 credits.
High Efficiency (Fix-1): A device with a duration of 
operation, such as a vacc suit or fueled vehicle, 
now functions for 50% longer on the same charge. 
Costs five times the device’s usual cost.
Infinite Magazine (Fix-3): The firearm now automati -
cally produces its own physical ammunition. Costs 
10,000 credits and two units of pretech salvage.
Infinite Power (Fix-3): A device powered by a Type A 
power cell now never runs out of power. Costs 
5,000 credits and one unit of pretech salvage.
Phasing (Fix-3): The weapon is tuned to partially phase 
through armor and impeding debris, granting a +1 
bonus to hit rolls with it. Costs 10,000 credits and 
two units of pretech salvage.
Polymorphic Blending (Fix-2): The armor can shift in 
appearance to that of normal clothing or differ -
ent-looking armor. Several dozen different ap -
pearances can be loaded into it at any one time. 
The armor functions and encumbers normally 
regardless of its external appearance. Costs 5,000 
credits and one unit of pretech salvage.
===== PAGE 96 =====

===== PAGE 97 =====
STARSHIPS
Countless ships rise from world upon world, the iron 
dust of new-forged shipyards sent out to make bridg-
es between the stars. For centuries, the privation and 
chaos that followed the Scream have made any concern 
beyond bare survival a luxury for all too many worlds. 
The last century has seen a reawakening, however, as 
myriad planets finally unlock the secrets of their own 
worlds and learn to use their native resources to rebuild 
the long-lost ships of their ancestors. The Silence is 
ending and worlds are now beginning to reach out to 
their unknown neighbors.
Different sectors have different degrees of devel -
opment. In some regions of space, starships have now 
been manufactured for centuries, with small spacecraft 
easily obtained by private individuals and modest com-
panies. These sectors have regular commerce between 
worlds, with interstellar drills no more remarkable 
than modern air travel. Aliens and offworlder humans 
are noticed but go without special remark. These sec -
tors often have relatively large stellar polities made up 
of numerous member stars, ones which often share the 
same general culture or political form. These sectors 
may still have backward planets or unknown worlds, 
but these are the exception.
In most Stars Without Number sectors, however, 
things aren’t that developed. Some worlds will have 
developed or retained functional shipyards and inter -
stellar flight is not anything remarkable to their citizens, 
but ownership of a starship is still a rare thing. Entire 
planetary navies might have fewer than a dozen ships, 
and only powerful and influential worlds will be sport-
ing cruisers or other heavy warships. There is enough 
commercial traffic to justify starports and trade stations, 
but free and easy transit between worlds has been lost 
for centuries, and is only slowly returning to the sector.
These sectors are rich in potential adventure. Even 
developed worlds may not be completely familiar with 
their stellar neighbors, and a number of lost worlds 
and out-of-contact societies can still be found in the 
sector. Starship captains can never be entirely certain 
what they’re going to meet when they drill into such a 
system, and no world is strong enough to exert its will 
carelessly around distant stars.
Acquiring Starships
In most sectors, it’s possible to buy civilian starships 
on any TL4 world. Such civilian ships are almost ex -
clusively fighter or frigate-class hulls, most usually free 
merchants or in-system shuttles, though a few wealthy 
worlds offer bulk freighter hulls as well. These ships 
might be armed to the extent that their buyer’s purse 
allows, but they are no match for real warships, and 
so few planets worry too much about who might buy 
them. Conspicuous acquisition of numerous armed 
merchants, however, might draw unwelcome interest.
Military hulls are a different matter. Even a lowly 
patrol boat is rarely permitted to a civilian buyer, let 
alone a fleet cruiser or other ship of the line. Even when 
these ships can be purchased, crewing them adequately 
can be far beyond the limits of an adventuring par -
ty’s purse. Even so, heroes who make the right friends 
or do the right favors to a planetary government can 
sometimes get letters of marque that entitle them to 
purchase hulls that would not normally be allowed into 
civilian hands.
Buying a ship is only one way to acquire it, howev-
er. Many adventurers find it more efficient to liberate 
a craft from undeserving owners, with an evening’s 
play revolving around the daring deeds and cunning 
subterfuge needed to acquire or salvage a ship for the 
party. Of course, the craft acquired by this means are 
rarely in perfect condition.
The ship and fitting prices that follow in this sec -
tion assume that starships are uncommon and expen-
sive investments, as they are in most sectors. If you are 
running a campaign in a region of easier access to ships, 
you should halve or even quarter the prices.
Navies and Piracy
Most TL4 worlds have some sort of space navy, even if 
it’s only a handful of patrol boats to watch the asteroid 
mines and monitor orbital space around their home -
world. A typical poor world might have a corvette and 
a half-dozen patrol boats, while the average TL4 planet 
sports a fleet cruiser, four corvettes or heavy frigates, 
and ten patrol boats, and a rich planet might have three 
times as many ships, possibly even a battleship or car-
rier to form the heart of its fleet. A third of these ships 
are usually in dock at any one time.
The threat of piracy varies from system to system. 
Pirates need a safe place to refit their ships and sell their 
stolen goods, and they need enough traffic to justify 
their trade. The ideal pirate system is one containing 
only a low-tech primitive world that can be raided for 
slaves and supplies, with a hidden or mobile deep-space 
repair base for maintenance, and two or more wealthy 
neighboring systems that send trade through. Such a 
pirate nest can persist for years, with system govern -
ments arguing over who should bear the cost of rooting 
them out, or too weak to overcome a charismatic pirate 
leader and their loot-hungry followers.
Very few pirates operate in a system with a strong 
naval presence. Small ships can sometimes get away 
with it for a time, hiding out in asteroid belts, striking 
merchants from ambush, and fleeing to safer systems 
before help can arrive. Larger pirate flotillas are a more 
existential threat to a planetary navy, and they are soon 
dispersed… or made the effective masters of the system 
as they blow up any ship that could prevent them from 
obtaining space supremacy.
===== PAGE 98 =====
94• building a StarShiP
sTarshIP hulls
Starship hulls are divided into four general hull classes: 
fighters, frigates, cruisers, and capital ships. The size 
of each class varies depending on the technological so-
phistication and available resources of their creators. In 
some sectors a smuggler’s free merchant frigate might 
measure no more than 34.75 meters from nose to tail, 
while in another it might be four times as large. As a 
general proportion, each class’ average size is usually 
from four to eight times larger than the class before it.
Each hull has several base attributes. Individual 
models might vary slightly, and careful tuning and cus-
tomization might alter these numbers as described later, 
but most ships of a given hull type will perform as listed.
Cost is the price of the base hull with a drive-1 
class spike drive. Any military hull type is generally 
unavailable without very good naval contacts with a 
shipyard’s owning government or a carefully-placed 
favor to those in authority.
Speed is the relative combat speed and maneuver -
ability of a ship. Over long distances a ship’s spike drive 
rating is all that matters, but in the tight quarters of 
combat this can make a great difference. A ship’s Speed 
is added to all Pilot skill checks made by the craft’s pilot, 
whether in combat or performing other maneuvers.
Armor is the measure of the ship’s plating and re-
dundant systems, and is subtracted from any incoming 
damage from hostile fire or hazardous space environ -
ments. Ship-mounted weapons with the Armor Pierc-
ing trait may ignore part or all of this rating. Ships 
generally cannot be harmed by anything short of other 
ship’s guns, vehicle-mounted Heavy weapons or care-
fully-placed demo charges. 
Hit Points reflects the amount of damage the ship 
can take before it explodes or becomes inoperable.
Crew lists the minimum crew necessary for basic 
operation and the maximum crew the life support sys-
tem can sustain for two months. Smaller crews than 
the maximum will make the ship’s life support last pro-
portionately longer. While it’s theoretically possible for 
a lone crewman to make a successful spike drill, the 
constant vigilance and wakefulness required mandates 
the use of heavy pharmaceuticals and great desperation. 
A minimum of three crew are normally required for a 
relatively safe drill.
Armor Class is a combination of agility and effec -
tive ECM denoting the difficulty of landing a solid hit 
on the ship.
Power is the amount of free power available after 
the ship’s basic operation is taken into account. Fittings 
and weapons take up some part of this power.
Mass records the amount of free mass left unas -
signed by the hull’s design. This free mass can be filled 
with fittings, weapons, or cargo holds.
Hardpoints indicate how many weapons a ship can 
successfully mount. Most weapons take up one hard -
point, though particularly large or power-hungry ones 
may take up more than that.
Finally, the class of the particular hull shows the 
general size of the ship. Some fittings and weapons 
have a minimum hull class, beneath which a ship is 
just too small to successfully install the hardware.
Starship hulls are sturdy enough to ignore damage 
from small arms or TL3 Heavy weapons. TL4 Heavy 
weapons or demo charges applied to the exterior of a 
ship do half damage minus the ship’s Armor. If a sab-
oteur gets inside with such weapons, the damage is 
halved but Armor does not apply. Use of some Heavy 
weapons in confined areas may be decidedly imprudent.
buIldIng a sTarshIP
Creating a starship in Stars Without Number is fairly 
simple, and requires only a few steps.
First, pick a hull type for the ship from the list 
below. The type will indicate the price of the base hull 
with a drive-1 spike drive, along with the available free 
power and mass.
Second, add fittings, weapons, and defenses from 
the pages that follow. Each such addition takes up a 
certain amount of power and mass, and may have a 
minimum hull size required for installation. Some fit -
tings and defenses cost more in money, power, or mass 
when installed on larger ships.
Third, decide how many crew members the ship 
will have. Most merchantmen run with no more than 
twice the minimum number of crew to save on wages. 
Warships rarely leave port with less than 75% of the 
maximum crew allowed. On average, crew members 
cost 100 credits a day in wages, plus 20 more for nec-
essary food and stores. PCs, naturally, are unlikely to 
charge themselves wages, but they need to eat.
Fourth, note down the six-month maintenance 
cost of the ship, which is equal to 5% of its total non-
crew cost. If this fee isn’t paid, a -1 penalty is applied to 
all skill checks and hit rolls related to the ship for each 
maintenance period skipped.
Lastly, fill in a ship record for the craft, marking 
down the ship’s statistics and the attack bonuses for the 
gunners using the ship’s weapons.
The speed of building or modifying a ship will de-
pend on the quality of available shipyards and the po-
litical importance of the job. On average, 25,000 credits 
a day of work or modifications can be done by most 
shipyards on average-importance jobs. Enough reason 
to rush can double or even quadruple this amount.
===== PAGE 99 =====
building a StarShiP •95 
Hull Type Cost Speed Armor HP Crew AC Power Mass Hard. Class
Strike Fighter 200k 5 5 8 1/1 16 5 2 1 Fighter
Shuttle 200k 3 0 15 1/10 11 3 5 1 Fighter
Free Merchant 500k 3 2 20 1/6 14 10 15 2 Frigate
Patrol Boat 2.5m 4 5 25 5/20 14 15 10 4 Frigate
Corvette 4m 2 10 40 10/40 13 15 15 6 Frigate
Heavy Frigate 7m 1 10 50 30/120 15 25 20 8 Frigate
Bulk Freighter 5m 0 0 40 10/40 11 15 25 2 Cruiser
Fleet Cruiser 10m 1 15 60 50/200 14 50 30 10 Cruiser
Battleship 50m 0 20 100 200/1,000 16 75 50 15 Capital
Carrier 60m 0 10 75 300/1,500 14 50 100 4 Capital
Small Station 5m N/A 5 120 20/200 11 50 40 10 Cruiser
Large Station 40m N/A 20 120 100/1000 17 125 75 30 Capital
Hull Types
The hull types listed below are some of the most com-
mon models found throughout the remnants of hu -
man space. Individual worlds often experiment with 
different vessels as they gradually develop their own 
astronautic doctrines, but these models have the benefit 
of long and proven utility.
Strike Fighter: Small craft, often modified to replace 
the spike drive with a system drive. Their speed, 
cheapness, and combat utility make them a popu-
lar choice as inexpensive system patrol craft.
Shuttle: The smallest craft that’s regularly used for inter-
stellar drills, a shuttle is a cheap means of moving 
small amounts of precious material or important 
persons between worlds.
Free Merchant: A hull type much beloved by adven -
turers, a free merchant has unimpressive combat 
utility but can carry substantial amounts of cargo 
while mounting enough weaponry to discourage 
small-craft piracy.
Patrol Boat: The hull of choice for customs cutters and 
system law enforcement, the patrol boat is a light 
frigate built heavy enough to overawe small mer-
chant vessels while still being relatively cheap to 
build and crew.
Corvette: The smallest true combat frigate, and often 
simply called a “frigate” by spacers. Corvettes have 
significantly thicker armor than patrol boats and 
trade additional crew needs and less maneuver -
ability for more available free mass.
Heavy Frigate: The heaviest starship that most poor 
or resource-deprived worlds can build, the heavy 
frigate can carry a significant loadout of weaponry 
and has enough crew to overwhelm most pirate 
ships if it comes to a boarding action. While it 
packs a substantial punch, it lacks the armor of a 
true cruiser-class warship.
Bulk Freighter: This class of huge cargo ship is found 
most often in peaceful, heavily-populated sectors.
Fleet Cruiser: The favored ship of the line of most 
wealthy, advanced worlds, and often the biggest 
and most powerful ship most planets can build. A 
cruiser’s heavy armor and infrastructural support 
for heavy guns make it a lethal weapon against 
frigates and any other ship not optimized for 
cracking heavy armor. They can prove vulnera -
ble to swarm attacks by fighter-bombers equipped 
with the right kind of armor-piercing weapons.
Battleship: Dreaded hulks of interstellar war, very few 
worlds have the necessary technology or economy 
to support the massive expense of building and 
crewing a battleship. Those that do gain access 
to a ship that is largely invulnerable to anything 
short of specially-designed anti-capital cruisers or 
hunter-killer frigates.
Carrier: The queen of a fleet, even fewer polities can 
afford to build one of these huge ships. Carriers 
can support flights of fighter or frigate-class war-
ships, ones specially equipped to handle particular 
missions. This versatility allows it to load fight -
er-bombers for anti-capital missions one month, 
and then switch to swarms of hunter-killer frig -
ates the next when a hostile system’s asteroid out-
posts need to be destroyed. Stripped of its combat 
wings, however, a carrier has less individual fire-
power than a cruiser.
Stations: Almost every space-faring world has at least 
one space station in orbit. A station has no Speed 
score, no spike drive, and cannot perform any 
maneuvers in combat, though its transit jets can 
slowly move it around a solar system over a matter 
of weeks. Civilian trade stations allow for docking 
by bulk freighters and ships not cleared to land on 
the surface, while military stations strictly forbid 
any civilian docking. The small station listed here 
is a Bannerjee-12, a common model found on poor 
or backwater worlds with little traffic. The large 
station represents an Arx, a major trade station for 
a hub world with money to spare.
===== PAGE 100 =====
96• building a StarShiP
sTarshIP fITTIngs
The following list of ship fittings are largely standard 
TL4 technologies that are available in most sectors. A 
few items on the list are rare pretech devices that can-
not be acquired without special connections or a lucky 
feat of salvage.
Some costs are marked with an asterisk. These 
costs are multiplied by 10 when the fitting is installed 
in a frigate-class hull, by 25 when installed in a cruis -
er-class hull, and by 100 when installed in a capital ship.
Some power and mass entries are marked with a 
hashmark. These costs are multiplied by 2 for frigates, 
3 for cruisers, and 4 for capital ships, rounded up. Note 
that you apply these multipliers even if the fitting only 
works on a large ship; a frigate with a Drill Course Reg-
ulator pays 250,000 credits, not 25,000.
Advanced research lab: A lab suitable for investigating 
alien xenolife, planetary geology, esoteric technol-
ogy, and other mysteries of the cosmos. The lab 
contains cold sleep pods adequate to contain alien 
samples, viro-shielded research cells, high-energy 
lasers, and other requisite tools. When used to in-
vestigate some phenomenon or object, any appli-
cable skill rolls are improved by +1 for a frigate lab, 
+2 for a cruiser lab, and +3 for a capital ship lab.
Advanced nav computer: Forging new spike courses is 
too much an art to rely on computerized assis -
tance, but an advanced nav computer can help on 
well-mapped routes. When navigating an inter-
stellar drill course with charts less than a year old, 
the navigator decreases drill difficulty by 2.
Amphibious operation: This fitting includes the benefits 
of the Atmospheric Configuration fitting, as well as 
allowing the ship to operate while immersed in a 
liquid medium. Submerged ships cannot be de -
tected with conventional planetary traffic sensors 
and require military sonar and naval sensors to fix 
their position, resources often unavailable on less 
developed worlds. So long as the ship stays away 
from military naval craft and bases, it is almost 
impossible to track while submerged. Only fighter 
and frigate hull classes can mount this fitting.
Armory: Rather than maintaining lengthy lists of ship 
equipment, a captain can simply buy an armory. 
Ships so equipped have whatever amounts of TL4 
military-grade weaponry and armor that a crew 
might require, and integral maintenance facilities 
for its upkeep. There is enough gear available to 
outfit the entire crew for normal use, but giving 
it away or losing it in use may deplete it.
Atmospheric configuration: This fitting must be put 
in place when the ship is built, and cannot be 
installed on cruiser-class or larger ships. A ship 
designed for atmospheric flight can land on most 
solid or aqueous surfaces.
Auto-targeting system: Some ships run with more guns 
than crewmen. A single NPC or PC can man one 
gun per round, firing it as often as the gunnery 
chief’s Fire One W eapon or Fire All Guns actions 
allow, but sometimes that’s not enough. Installing 
an autonomic targeting system for a gun allows it 
to shoot at a +2 hit bonus without human assis-
tance. This system must be installed once for each 
gun that is to be self-manned.
Automation support: The ship has been carefully fitted 
to support the use of non-sentient expert system 
robots in its operation. At least one human, VI, 
or True AI crew member is necessary to oversee 
the bots and monitor spike drills, but otherwise 
crew may be replaced with cheap, basic robots at 
a cost of 1,000 credits per crew member replaced. 
Bots don’t draw pay, don’t take up life support, 
and their maintenance is assumed to be part of the 
ship’s operating costs. These bots are incapable of 
any actions unrelated to operating the ship and 
are treated as level-0 in their skills where relevant.
Boarding tubes: Armored tubes equipped with laser cut-
ter apertures can be used to forcibly invade a hos-
tile ship, provided the target’s engines have been 
disabled. Ships without boarding tubes have to 
send invaders across empty space to either make 
an assault on a doubtless heavily-guarded airlock 
or cut their way in through the hull with laser 
cutters and half an hour of work.
Cargo lighter: Cruisers and larger craft can’t land on 
planetary bodies, so they require small shuttlec -
raft for transport. A cargo lighter is only capable 
of surface-to-orbit flight, which takes roughly 
twenty minutes either way, but can latch on to 
a standard pressurized cargo container holding 
up to 200 tons of cargo and passengers. These 
containers are usually collapsible and take up no 
significant space when compressed for storage, as-
suming they’re not simply disposable cargo shells. 
This fitting can be purchased multiple times.
Cargo space: Free mass can be traded for pressurized 
cargo space. Tracked by weight for convenience, 
one cubic meter is usually one ton, with most ve-
hicles requiring ten tons when loaded, tanks tak-
ing 25, and aircraft or mechs taking up 50 tons of 
cargo space. One point of free mass grants 2 tons 
of cargo space in a fighter, 20 tons in a frigate, 200 
tons in a cruiser, and 2000 tons in a capital-class 
ship. This fitting can be purchased multiple times.
Cold sleep pods: These stasis pods can keep a subject 
alive for centuries provided that the ship’s power 
doesn’t fail. Each installation allows for keeping 
a number of people equal to the ship’s maximum 
crew in stasis indefinitely. This fitting can be in-
stalled multiple times.
===== PAGE 101 =====
building a StarShiP •97 
Ship Fitting Cost Power Mass Class Effect
Advanced lab 10k* 1# 2 Frigate Skill bonus for analysis and research
Advanced nav computer 10k* 1# 0 Frigate Adds +2 for traveling familiar spike courses
Amphibious operation 25k* 1 1# Fighter Can land and can operate under water
Armory 10k* 0 0 Frigate W eapons and armor for the crew
Atmospheric configuration 5k* 0 1# Fighter Can land: frigates and fighters only.
Auto-targeting system 50k 1 0 Fighter Fires one weapon system without a gunner
Automation support 10k* 2 1 Fighter Ship can use simple robots as crew
Boarding tubes 5k* 0 1 Frigate Allows boarding of a hostile disabled ship
Cargo lighter 25k 0 2 Frigate Orbit-to-surface cargo shuttle
Cargo space No cost 0 1 Fighter Pressurized cargo space
Cold sleep pods 5k* 1 1 Frigate Keeps occupants in stasis
Colony core 100k* 4 2# Frigate Ship can be deconstructed into a colony base
Drill course regulator 25k* 1# 1 Frigate Common drill routes become auto-successes
Drive-2 upgrade 10k* 1# 1# Fighter Upgrade a spike drive to drive-2 rating
Drive-3 upgrade 20k* 2# 2# Fighter Upgrade a spike drive to drive-3 rating
Drive-4 upgrade 40k* 2# 3# Frigate Upgrade a spike drive to drive-4 rating
Drive-5 upgrade 100k* 3# 3# Frigate Upgrade a spike drive to drive-5 rating
Drive-6 upgrade 500k* 3# 4# Cruiser Upgrade a spike drive to drive-6 rating
Drop pod 300k 0 2 Frigate Stealthed landing pod for troops
Emissions dampers 25k* 1# 1# Fighter Adds +2 to skill checks to avoid detection
Exodus bay 50k* 1# 2# Cruiser House vast numbers of cold sleep passengers
Extended life support 5k* 1# 1# Fighter Doubles maximum crew size
Extended medbay 5k* 1 1 Frigate Can provide medical care to more patients
Extended stores 2.5k* 0 1# Fighter Maximum life support duration is doubled
Fuel bunkers 2.5k* 0 1 Fighter Adds fuel for one more drill between fuelings
Fuel scoops 5k* 2 1# Frigate Ship can scoop fuel from a gas giant or star
Hydroponic production 10k* 1# 2# Cruiser Ship produces life support resources
Lifeboats 2.5k* 0 1 Frigate Emergency escape craft for a ship’s crew
Luxury cabins 10k* 1 1# Frigate 10% of the max crew get luxurious quarters
Mobile extractor 50k 2 1 Frigate Space mining and refinery fittings
Mobile factory 50k* 3 2# Cruiser Self-sustaining factory and repair facilities
Precognitive nav chamber 100k* 1 0 Frigate Allows a precog to assist in navigation
Psionic anchorpoint Special 3 0 Frigate Focal point for allied psychics’ powers
Sensor mask 10k* 1# 0 Frigate At long distances, disguise ship as another
Ship bay/fighter 200k 0 2 Cruiser Carrier housing for a fighter
Ship bay/frigate 1m 1 4 Capital Carrier housing for a frigate
Ship’s locker 2k* 0 0 Frigate General equipment for the crew
Shiptender mount 25k* 1 1 Frigate Allow another ship to hitch on a spike drive
Smuggler’s hold 2.5k* 0 1 Fighter Small amount of well-hidden cargo space
Survey sensor array 5k* 2 1 Frigate Improved planetary sensory array
System drive Special +1# +2# Fighter Replace spike drive with small system drive
Teleportation pads Special 1 1 Frigate Pretech teleportation to and from ship
Tractor beams 10k* 2 1 Frigate Manipulate objects in space at a distance
Vehicle transport fittings 2.5k* 0 1# Frigate Halve tonnage space of carried vehicles
Workshop 500* 1 0.5# Frigate Automated tech workshops for maintenance
===== PAGE 102 =====
98• building a StarShiP
Colony core: The ship has been designed to act as the 
core of a future settlement. Once this fitting is 
engaged, the ship ceases to be operational as a 
starship, and builds out into a set of habitats, hy-
droponic gardens, fusion plants, and living spaces 
sufficient to support up to five times its maximum 
crew, including enough fabrication and workshop 
facilities to keep the settlement operational un -
der normal conditions. The settlement can be a 
deep-space hab, orbital installation, or planetary 
settlement. In the latter case, the ship must land 
to form the settlement; even ships without atmo-
spheric operations can do so, but they can never 
take off again. Once activated, a colony core can-
not be re-packed.
Drill course regulator: Drills along a known spike drive 
route have no chance of failure so long as the route 
is no longer than twice the operating pilot’s skill 
level and does not involve course trimming. Thus, 
a navigator with Pilot-1 skill would always succeed 
in making a drill of two hexes or less, provided the 
route was a known one. The drill course regu -
lator requires a sophisticated technical base and 
compatible metadimensional energy conditions 
in a given sector; many sectors no longer have 
this technology or lack the right environment to 
use it. If the GM prefers a campaign where space 
travel is always at least somewhat dangerous, they 
may deny access to this fitting. Ships piloted by 
exceptionally talented navigators may choose not 
to mount it even then.
Drive upgrades: A ship can improve its standard-issue 
drive-1 spike drive with additional phase filters 
and power throughput refinements. A captain 
needs buy only the final grade of drive desired. He 
does not have to buy upgrades sequentially. Drives 
of rating 4 and higher are generally TL5 artifacts 
that cannot be built most modern worlds.
Drop pod: Armored and stealthed versions of cargo 
lighters, these craft are twice as fast, apply a -3 
penalty to tracking and targeting skill checks, and 
can carry up to one hundred troops or passengers. 
Many are equipped with assorted Heavy weapons 
to clear the landing zone, and can be treated as 
flight-capable gravtanks for purposes of combat. 
This fitting can be purchased multiple times.
Emissions dampers: Stealth systems can mask the ship’s 
energy emissions through careful modulation of 
the output. All travel times inside a star system are 
doubled when the system is engaged, but any skill 
checks to avoid detection gain a +2 bonus.
Exodus bay: These banked rows of compressed cold 
sleep pods are designed to carry enormous num-
bers of people in extended hibernation, most of-
ten colonists to some new homeworld or escapees 
from some stellar disaster. A cruiser can carry up 
to 1,000 colonists in stasis, while a capital ship 
can handle up to 5,000. Each further time this fit-
ting is selected, these numbers double. These pods 
put their inhabitants into very deep hibernation 
so as to minimize the resources necessary to main-
tain their lives. Bringing them out of this stasis 
requires a month of “defrost”. Crash awakenings 
have a 25% chance of killing the subject. The pods 
are rated for 100 years of stasis, but their actual 
maximum duration is somewhat speculative.
Extended life support: The ship can be designed to ac-
commodate a larger number of crew or passengers. 
Extended life support can be fitted multiple times; 
each time, the maximum crew rating of the ship 
increases by 100% of its normal maximum. Thus, 
a free merchant who installs this twice can have a 
maximum complement of 18 people.
Extended medbay: All ships are equipped with basic 
medical facilities for curing lightly injured crew 
members and keeping the seriously injured ones 
stable until reaching a planet. An extended med -
bay improves those facilities, allowing for the 
medical treatment of up to the ship’s entire max-
imum crew at once, including the treatment of 
critically wounded passengers.
Extended stores: A normal complement of ship’s stores 
can keep the maximum crew size supplied for two 
months. Each selection of Extended Stores doubles 
that time, and can be fitted multiple times.
Fuel bunkers: Most ships require refueling after each 
drill jump, no matter the distance. Installing fuel 
bunkers allows the ship to carry one additional 
load of fuel. This fitting can be installed multiple 
times for ships that wish to minimize fueling.
Fuel scoops: Fuel scoops allow for the harvesting and 
extraction of hydrogen from gas giants or the 
penumbra of solar bodies. The extraction process 
requires four days of processing and refinement, 
but completely refuels the ship. Such fittings are 
common on explorer craft that cannot expect to 
find refueling stations.
Hydroponic production: Some ships are designed to pro-
duce food and air supplies for the crew. Selecting 
hydroponic production allows for the indefinite 
supply of a number of crewmen equal to the ship’s 
maximum crew. This option may be taken multi-
ple times for farm ships, in which case each addi-
tional selection doubles the number of people the 
ship can support.
Lifeboats: Selecting this fitting equips the ship with 
a number of single-use escape craft capable of 
reaching the nearest habitable planet or station 
in a star system. If no such destination exists, 
the boats can maintain their passengers for up 
to a year in drugged semi-stasis. Lifeboats have 
fully-functional comm systems and are usually 
equipped with basic survival supplies and distress 
beacons. A single selection of this fitting provides 
enough lifeboats for a ship’s maximum crew, with 
up to twenty people per boat.
===== PAGE 103 =====
building a StarShiP •99 
Luxury cabins: Each time this fitting is selected, 10% 
of the ship’s maximum crew gain access to lux -
ury cabins of a spaciousness sufficient to please 
a wealthy star-farer. This fitting comes with the 
usual zero-gee athletic courts, decorative foun -
tains, fine dining, and artistic fittings.
Mobile extractor: Automated mining and refinery 
equipment has been built into the ship, allowing 
it to extract resources from asteroids and plane -
tary surfaces. Careful extraction of specific lodes 
of valuable minerals can be quite profitable at the 
GM’s discretion, but if the crew is simply melt -
ing down available asteroids for raw materials, 
the unit can refine one ton of usable materials 
per day worth about 500 credits in most markets. 
These raw materials can be used to feed a mobile 
factory, and a ship may have more than one mo-
bile extractor fitted to it to multiply the return 
if sufficient raw feedstock is available. Operating 
an extractor requires at least five crew members.
Mobile factory: The ship is equipped with a full-scale 
TL4 fabrication plant programmed to support its 
needs. The ship can stock raw materials and parts 
at 5,000 credits per ton; these parts can then be 
used to “pay” ship repair or maintenance costs 
when conventional shipyards are unavailable. The 
factory can also create and repair vehicles, TL4 
equipment, space habs, and planetary structures 
with these parts at a rate of 10,000 credits worth 
of construction a day. If a mobile extractor is 
available, the raw materials processed by the lat -
ter unit can be used to feed the factory. Operating 
a mobile factory requires at least 100 well-trained 
personnel. Each 10 fewer available doubles repair 
or maintenance times.
Precognitive nav chamber: An extremely rare example 
of psitech dating from before the Scream, a pre -
cognitive nav chamber allows a character with at 
least Precognition-2 psionic skill to assist in inter-
stellar drills, sensing impending shear alterations 
before they happen. The navigator automatically 
succeeds on any spike drill check of difficulty 9 or 
less. On a failed check, add 2 to the Spike Drive 
Mishap roll, limiting the potential damage. On 
drilling in to the destination system, the psychic 
has expended all Effort in the process.
Psionic anchorpoint: This pretech relic is unavailable on 
the open market in most sectors. Once installed 
in a ship, it can be “imprinted” by up to a dozen 
psychics. These psychics can sense and affect any 
object or location within ten meters of the relic 
after one minute of concentration, provided they 
are within the same solar system. Thus, teleport -
ers can always teleport next to the anchorpoint, 
telepaths can always contact anyone within the 
affected zone, telekinetics can manipulate objects 
near the relic, and so forth. The relic can be re -
coded to eliminate existing imprints, but any psy-
chic who gets access to the relic for ten minutes of 
meditation and focus can imprint on it afterwards. 
There is no obvious way to tell how many psychics 
have imprinted to the anchorpoint.
Sensor mask: The ship can disguise its long-range sen-
sor readings, spoofing scans with the ID tags and 
apparent hull type of any other ship of its choice. 
To penetrate this masquerade, the scanning enti -
ty must beat a Wis/Program skill check against 
difficulty 10 plus the Program skill of the mask -
ing ship’s comms officer. Once the ship is close 
enough to visually identify, the masking is useless.
===== PAGE 104 =====
100• building a StarShiP
Ship bays: These sophisticated docking bays provide 
all the necessary tools and support for launching 
a starship from the mother craft. They are rare -
ly seen outside of dedicated capital-class carriers, 
but some cruisers make room to mount a fight-
er-class attack shuttle. Each bay allows room for 
one ship of the appropriate hull class. While the 
carried ship can support its own crew if neces -
sary, most carriers fold their space wing into the 
mothership’s crew roster. This fitting can be taken 
multiple times.
Ship’s locker: Much like an armory, this option allows 
a captain to lay in a general supply of equipment 
likely to be useful to explorers and spacemen. Any 
TL4 equipment on the gear list can be found in 
the ship’s locker in amounts commensurate with 
the ship’s size. A few guns and some basic armor 
might be included as well, but for serious arma -
ment an armory is required. There is enough gear 
available to outfit the entire crew for normal use, 
but giving it away or losing it in use may deplete 
the locker until it is restocked.
Shiptender mount: The ship is designed with symbiosis 
mounts that allow other ships to “hitch” on the 
craft’s spike drills. Each shiptender mount allows 
one craft of a hull size smaller than the tender to 
link up for intersystem drills. Mounts cannot be 
used for in-system travel. If the linking ship has 
been designed to be carried by a tender then es -
tablishing this link takes one hour. If not, it takes 
a full day to fit the ship into the mount. Ships can 
dismount from the tender with an hour’s disen -
tanglement. In an emergency, the carried ships can 
dismount instantly, but the mountings are consid-
ered disabled then until repairs are made. Carried 
ships cannot fight.
Smuggler’s hold: Carefully-designed storage space in -
tended to conceal illicit cargo from customs in -
spection. Each installation of this fitting adds 200 
kilograms of cargo space in a fighter, 2 tons in a 
frigate, 20 tons in a cruiser, or 200 tons in a capi -
tal ship. Cargo in a smuggler’s hold will never be 
found by a standard customs inspection. Careful 
investigation by a suspicious official can find it on 
a difficulty 10 check using their Wis/Notice skill, 
and a week-long search one step short of disas -
sembly will find it on a difficulty 7 check.
Survey sensor array: Most ships require only basic 
analysis of a star system, sufficient to identify 
population centers, do rough scanning of an ob-
ject’s composition, and chart major navigational 
hazards. Survey sensor arrays greatly enhance 
the ship’s sensor abilities, allowing for finely-de -
tailed mapping of objects and planets, along with 
broad-spectrum communications analysis. They 
also improve attempts to detect other craft when 
scanning a region for stealthy vessels. Any rolls 
with survey sensor arrays add +2 to skill checks.
System drive: The ship’s standard drive-1 spike drive is 
removed and replaced with a different propulsion 
system. The ship is still treated as having a drive-1 
for maneuvering and system transit purposes, but 
it cannot make interstellar drills. This modifica -
tion lowers the cost of the basic hull by 10% and 
adds extra power and space based on the size of 
the hull: 1 power for fighters, 2 for frigates, 3 for 
cruisers, and 4 for capital ship hulls. Twice this 
amount of free mass is gained by the process.
Teleportation pads: This TL5 tech is completely unavail-
able in most sectors and was uncommon even on 
Mandate-era ships. The pads allow up to a dozen 
people or 1,200 kilograms of matter to be tele -
ported to and from the surface of a planet or the 
interior of a another ship, provided it is no more 
than a few tens of thousands of kilometers distant. 
Ship-to-ship teleportation is possible only when 
the receiving ship is cooperating by transmitting 
accurate coordinate details; otherwise, a friendly, 
unjammed signal from inside is necessary to lock 
onto the target point. Planetary teleportations are 
possible only in the absence of physical barriers 
between the ship and the target point below. The 
teleporters may be used once every five minutes. 
In those rare sectors where this tech is widely 
available, it costs 200k.
Tractor beams: Gravitic projectors allow the ship to ma-
nipulate objects within its immediate area, push -
ing, pulling, and sliding objects no larger than a 
ship of one hull class smaller. Targets with ship-
scale propulsion can resist the beams, but lifeboats, 
individual suit jets, or other smaller propulsors 
are inadequate. The beam can focus on only one 
object at a time but can move it into the ship’s 
cargo bays or hurl it out of the ship’s immediate 
vicinity within three rounds. The beams can only 
effectively manipulate objects in very low gravity, 
and not those on the surface of planets or other 
objects with significant natural gravity.
Vehicle transport fittings: The ship has been fitted with 
specialized mounts, bunking, cargo bays, and 
other facilities to expedite the transport of of -
ten-unwieldy vehicles, including mechs and other 
military craft. Any vehicles carried count as only 
half their usual cargo tonnage. Assuming trained 
operators, up to four vehicles can be offloaded or 
ramped onto the ship per round in cases where 
speed is critical.
Workshops: On-board workshops can be bought at 
smaller than maximum sizes than a hull would al-
low, if additional TL4 tech facilities aren’t strictly 
needed. A frigate-sized workshop is sufficient for 
modding any personal gear as per the modification 
rules on page 100. A cruiser-sized workshop can 
handle vehicle modding and starship maintenance, 
and a capital-class workshop can build vehicles or 
similar large work from scratch at full cost.
===== PAGE 105 =====
building a StarShiP •101 
sTarshIP defenses
The defenses listed here are some of the more common 
ones installed in modern TL4 starships. Most non-war-
ships mount little or nothing in the way of special de-
fenses, preferring to save the hull space for cargo and 
immediately useful fittings.
Ablative Hull Compartments: By sacrificing empty hull 
space in a complex system of ablative blast baffles, 
a capital-class ship can have a large amount of its 
total mass shot away without actually impinging 
on its normal function. This grants it a +1 AC 
bonus and 20 extra maximum hit points.
Augmented Plating: At the cost of a certain amount of 
speed and maneuverability, a ship can have its ar-
mor plating reinforced against glancing hits, gain-
ing a +2 bonus to its AC. This augmentation can 
decrease a ship’s Speed below 0, meaning it will 
be applied as a penalty to all Pilot tests.
Boarding Countermeasures: The ship has hardened 
bulkheads, reinforced hatches, and specially-de -
signed automated kill corridors for wiping out 
intruders. Provided that the ship’s bridge is still 
under control, the operator can prevent entry to 
the ship by any force that lacks shipyard-grade 
tools, weapons capable of melting hull plating, 
or specialized military breaching implements. If 
intruders do get inside, only well-equipped, spe -
cially-trained marines have any real chance of 
breaching the defenses. Ordinary space pirates or 
more casual invaders have only a 1 in 6 chance 
of threatening the bridge crew, though they may 
cause significant damage in their dying.
Burst ECM Generator: A high-powered secondary ECM 
generator can be activated to negate any one oth-
erwise-successful hit against the ship. This gen -
erator can be activated after the damage has been 
rolled, but enemy ships rapidly compensate for the 
new ECM source, and so the generator can only 
be used effectively once per engagement.
Foxer Drones: These drones are invariably short-lived 
due to the enormous energy signatures they pro-
duce, but until the ship’s next turn they grant a +2 
AC bonus as their emissions confuse foes. Foxer 
drones are cheaply constructed and essentially 
free; the only limit on their number is the amount 
of free space set aside for holding them.
Grav Eddy Displacer: This system links with a ship’s 
navigational subsystem and randomizes the mo -
tion vectors in sympathy with metadimensional 
gravitic currents. This agility gives any hit on the 
ship a 1 in 6 chance of being negated entirely.
Hardened Polyceramic Overlay: A complex glazing pro-
cess can harden the surface of a ship’s armor to 
more effectively shed incoming attacks, decreas -
ing the armor-piercing quality of any hit by 5.
Planetary Defense Array: The ship is equipped with 
an array of gravitic braker guns and an upgrad-
ed nuke snuffer field. While useless in conven -
tional ship-to-ship combat, the array can deflect 
or dampen meteor impacts, dropped penetrator 
rods, or other non-powered bombardment tech -
niques, and the snuffer field is powerful enough 
to prevent nuclear fission reactions over a hemi -
sphere-sized area. A single ship with a PDA can 
protect against any natural meteor strikes and 
deny easy terror bombardment of a planet’s pop-
ulation. The PDA cannot fully protect against 
orbital strikes by powered penetrators, but it can 
nudge them off course and make pinpoint strikes 
impractical. Most developed planets have much 
more powerful and effective ground installations, 
but a PDA-equipped ship is a useful emergency 
stopgap for poor or primitive worlds.
Point Defense Lasers: Too small to damage ships, these 
point defense lasers can detonate or melt incom-
ing munitions, improving the ship’s defenses 
against torpedoes, fractal impact charges, and 
other ammunition-based weapons.
Ship Defense Cost Power Mass Class Effect
Ablative Hull Compartments 100k* 5 2# Capital  +1 AC, +20 maximum hit points
Augmented Plating 25k* 0 1# Fighter  +2 AC, -1 Speed
Boarding Countermeasures 25k* 2 1# Frigate Makes enemy boarding more difficult
Burst ECM Generator 25k* 2 1# Frigate Negate one successful hit
Foxer Drones 10k* 2 1# Cruiser  +2 AC for one round when fired, Ammo 5
Grav Eddy Displacer 50k* 5 2# Frigate 1 in 6 chance of any given attack missing.
Hardened Polyceramic Overlay 25k* 0 1# Fighter AP quality of attacking weapons reduced by 5
Planetary Defense Array 50k* 4 2# Frigate Anti-impact and anti-nuke surface defenses
Point Defense Lasers 10k* 3 2# Frigate  +2 AC versus weapons that use ammo
* Credit costs are multiplied by 10 for frigate-class hulls, 25 for cruisers, and 100 for capital-class hulls
# These costs are multiplied by 2 for frigates, 3 for cruisers, and 4 for capital hulls.
===== PAGE 106 =====
102• building a StarShiP
sTarshIP WeaPonry
Space is dangerous, and most ships mount the best 
weapons their purse and their ship’s infrastructure 
can support. While most worlds limit the purchase of 
warships by civilians, few place restraints on the type 
of weapons a civilian ship can mount.
Ship weaponry tends to come in two classes. One 
class of weapon is damaging and has moderate pow -
er and mass demands, but has comparatively weak 
armor-piercing capabilities. Another class of weap -
on is expensive, taxing to a ship’s systems, and may 
have somewhat inferior damage, but it has enough ar-
mor-piercing to affect a warship of a hull size one step 
larger than the mounting starship.
The choice of which class of weapon to mount 
usually depends on the type of opposition the designer 
expects the ship to face. Most civilian ships favor the 
former kind, as few expect to engage true warships.
Weapon Qualities
Ammo: The weapon or defense requires ammunition 
to fire. Each round’s cost is listed after the weap-
on’s cost, and a number of rounds equal to the 
weapon’s Ammo rating can be fit into one free 
mass unit. For example, a torpedo launcher can fit 
the magazine and loading gear for four torpedoes 
into one free mass unit, and each torpedo will cost 
2,500 credits. For each ship class larger than the 
minimum required to mount the weapon, double 
the stored ammo per unit. The weapon itself in-
cludes one free mass unit worth of ammunition 
as part of the installation, so simply mounting a 
torpedo launcher alone on a frigate gives the ship 
four rounds of ammo.
AP: The weapon ignores this many points of a target’s 
armor. The Hardened Polyceramic Overlay defense 
upgrade may lessen the effectiveness of this quali-
ty. The most a weapon’s AP rating can do is reduce 
a target’s effective armor to zero. It cannot add 
additional damage to a hit.
Cloud: The weapon fires an omni-directional wave 
or spray of projectiles. It automatically targets 
all fighter-class ships that have attacked the ship 
within the past round, and the gunner may make 
one attack roll against each target. Cloud weapons 
have no effect on ships larger than fighter-class 
hulls or intruders who are actually on the hull.
Clumsy: Either through a slow discharge time or un -
wieldy engineering requirements, this weapon 
suffers -4 to hit small fighter-class hulls.
Flak: These weapons launch vast numbers of small 
energy discharges or projectiles, and are particu -
larly dangerous to small ships that rely on speed 
over thick armor. Against fighter-class hulls, these 
weapons roll hit rolls and damage rolls twice and 
take the better result.
Weapon Descriptions
Each weapon listed below has a cost, the damage die it 
uses on a hit, and the amount of hardpoints, free power, 
and mass it takes up in a hull. The minimum hull class 
required to mount it is also listed, as is the minimum 
tech level to manufacture it.
All ship weapon attack and damage rolls use the 
better of the gunner’s Intelligence or Dexterity modi-
fiers. Most use Shoot as the relevant skill, though Pilot 
can be used for the guns of a fighter-class ship.
Multifocal Laser: Twinned assay and penetration la -
sers modulate the frequency of this beam for re -
markable armor penetration. These weapons are 
popular choices for fighters intended for frigate 
or cruiser engagement.
Reaper Battery: Stepped tapping of the spike drive 
power plant allows for the emission of a torrent 
of charged particles. The particles have very little 
armor penetration, but can fry a small ship’s pow-
er grid in a strike or two.
Fractal Impact Charge: A spray of penetrator sabots that 
use fractal surfacing to increase impact. Favored 
for bomber-class fighter hulls.
Polyspectral MES Beam: A rare example of pretech 
weaponry, a fighter equipped with a PMB can 
scratch even a battleship’s hull.
Sandthrower: Projecting a spray of tiny, dense partic -
ulate matter, sandthrowers are highly effective 
against lightly-armored fighters.
Flak Emitter Battery: A baseline frigate anti-fighter sys-
tem, this battery fires waves of lasers or charged 
particles to knock down small craft.
Torpedo Launcher: Capable of damaging even a battle-
ship, torpedoes are cumbersome, expensive, and 
often the core of a line frigate’s armament.
Charged Particle Caster: A focalized upgrade to the 
reaper battery, the CPC has a much better armor 
penetration profile.
Plasma Beam: With superior targeting and a smaller 
energy drain than a CPC, a plasma beam sacrifices 
some armor penetration.
Mag Spike Array: A storm of magnetically-accelerated 
spike charges is almost guaranteed to eradicate any 
fighter-class craft it hits.
Nuclear Missiles: Useless in ship-to-ship combat or 
against any other TL4 planet with working nuke 
snuffers, one of these missiles can still erase an 
entire lostworlder city without such protection.
Spinal Beam Cannon: One of the first spinal-mount class 
weapons, the SBC briefly channels the full power 
of the ship into a charged beam. It lacks the power 
and penetration of the more advanced gravcan -
non, but also takes less power to mount.
===== PAGE 107 =====
Ground Weapons vs. Ships
On rare occasions, PCs will have to deal with small 
arms fire against their spaceship, or evade ground 
guns when trying to escape a port or land safely 
on a hostile world. 
As a basic rule of thumb, hostile TL3 small 
arms fire does no damage, TL4 small arms fire 
does 1d6 damage per ten minutes of persistent 
gunfire, and Heavy weapons do half their rolled 
damage, minus the ship’s Armor. Multiple Heavy 
weapons blazing away at a grounded free mer -
chant can reduce it to unflyable scrap in short 
order, but a peppering of mag rifle fire is unlikely 
to do serious damage to a ship that decamps with 
sufficient speed.
It is impossible to miss a grounded ship. The 
Armor Class of a ship in flight will vary with the 
situation; AC 10 for hovering nearby, AC 15 for 
close-to-earth flight, and AC 20 if the ship is sim-
ply flying within weapon range.
Active ground-placed anti-ship defenses are 
a different matter. These massive lasers and ener-
gy projectors are absolutely lethal at atmospheric 
ranges. Avoiding them is a Pilot skill check at a 
GM-chosen difficulty of 8 to 10 for each round the 
ship is exposed, suffering 2d10 damage with AP 
20 on each miss. A desperate ship can get outside 
the gun’s firing angle if it can survive three rounds 
of this peril.
building a StarShiP •103 
Ship Weapon Cost Dmg Power Mass Hard. Class TL Qualities
Multifocal Laser 100k 1d4 5 1 1 Fighter 4 AP 20
Reaper Battery 100k 3d4 4 1 1 Fighter 4 Clumsy
Fractal Impact Charge 200k/500 2d6 5 1 1 Fighter 4 AP 15, Ammo 4
Polyspectral MES Beam 2m 2d4 5 1 1 Fighter 5 AP 25
Sandthrower 50k 2d4 3 1 1 Fighter 4 Flak
Flak Emitter Battery 500k 2d6 5 3 1 Frigate 4 AP 10, Flak
Torpedo Launcher 500k/2.5k 3d8 10 3 1 Frigate 4 AP 20, Ammo 4
Charged Particle Caster 800k 3d6 10 1 2 Frigate 4 AP 15, Clumsy
Plasma Beam 700k 3d6 5 2 2 Frigate 4 AP 10
Mag Spike Array 1m/5k 2d6+2 5 2 2 Frigate 4 Flak, AP 10, Ammo 5
Nuclear Missiles 50k/5k Special 5 1 2 Frigate 4 Ammo 5
Spinal Beam Cannon 1.5m 3d10 10 5 3 Cruiser 4 AP 15, Clumsy
Smart Cloud 2m 3d10 10 5 2 Cruiser 4 Cloud, Clumsy
Gravcannon 2m 4d6 15 4 3 Cruiser 4 AP 20
Spike Inversion Projector 2.5m 3d8 10 3 3 Cruiser 4 AP 15
Vortex Tunnel Inductor 5m 3d20 20 10 4 Capital 4 AP 20, Clumsy
Mass Cannon 5m/50k 2d20 10 5 4 Capital 4 AP 20, Ammo 4
Lightning Charge Mantle 4m 1d20 15 5 2 Capital 4 AP 5, Cloud
Singularity Gun 20m 5d20 25 10 5 Capital 5 AP 25
Smart Cloud: A swarm of self-directed microdrones 
sweeps over the ship. Their integral beam weap-
onry is too small to damage larger ships, but they 
can wipe out an attacking fighter wave.
Gravcannon: Using much the same principles as 
man-portable grav weaponry, the gravcannon 
causes targets to fall apart in a welter of mutual-
ly-antagonistic gravitic fields.
Spike Inversion Projector: The SIP uses the ship’s spike 
phasing as an offensive weapon, penetrating the 
target with a brief incursion of MES energies that 
largely ignore attempts to evade.
Vortex Tunnel Inductor: A capital-class model of the SIP, 
a VTI is capable of incapacitating a cruiser in two 
hits. Its bulk limits its utility against fighter-class 
craft, however.
Mass Cannon: By firing projectiles almost as large as 
fighter-scale craft, the mass cannon inflicts tre -
mendous damage on a target. Serious ammunition 
limitations hamper its wider-scale use.
Lightning Charge Mantle: Modulation of the ship’s 
power core emits a cloak of MES lightning. While 
larger spike drive craft can shunt the energies 
away harmlessly, fighter-class ships are almost 
invariably destroyed if hit.
Singularity Gun: One of the few surviving pretech 
weapons in anything resembling wide currency, 
this capital-class weapons system fires something 
mathematically related to a miniaturized black 
hole at a target. 
===== PAGE 108 =====
104• examPle StarShiPS
eXamPle sTarshIPs
Below are the final statistics for some of the more 
common starship models in post-Silence human space. 
Each entry includes the default NPC crew skill modifier 
and the normal number of Command Points each one 
gets each round under NPC crews.
Costs are listed for the ship itself, for its six-month 
maintenance, and for the yearly employment of its 
standard crew complement. PCs naturally need not 
draw this pay, though they’ll still need to lay out 20 
credits a day per head for food and other basic supplies.
Strike Fighter
HP: 8 Power: 5/1 free
AC: 16 Mass: 2/0 free
Armor: 5 Crew: 1/1
Speed: 5 Hull Class: Fighter
Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 4
Weapons: Reaper Battery (+4/3d4, Clumsy)
Defenses: None
Fittings: Spike Drive-1
Atmospheric Configuration
Cost: 305K base price, 15,250 maintenance, 
43,800 yearly crew cost for 1 pilot
The standard drill-capable fighter craft of most TL4 
polities, this model retains a spike drive instead of re-
placing it with a cheaper systems drive. While the lone 
pilot would have to be desperate and heavily drugged 
to make an entire spike drill solo, it remains an option 
when no larger craft is available.
This particular model is equipped with a reaper 
battery for dealing with small, lightly-armored civil -
ian ships. “Bomber”-type fighters usually replace this 
with a fractal impact charge to threaten larger warships, 
while fighters built to dogfight their peers favor fitting 
a multifocal laser.
Shuttle
HP: 15 Power: 3/2 free
AC: 11 Mass: 5/0 free
Armor: 0 Crew: 1/20
Speed: 3 Hull Class: Fighter
Crew Skill: +1 NPC CP: 4
Weapons: None
Defenses: None
Fittings:
Spike Drive-1
Atmospheric Configuration
Extended Life Support, 6 tons cargo
Cost: 210K base price, 10,500 maintenance, 
43,800 yearly crew cost for 1 pilot
This craft is a conventional civilian shuttle, albeit one 
with a spike drive sufficient to get it to a neighboring 
system and enough passenger space to make it a min-
imally-acceptable transport for brave VIPs and light 
cargo. If used as an inter-system transport, however, at 
least three crew will be needed to safely navigate a drill.
While cheap and flexible, the shuttle is entirely 
unarmed and acutely vulnerable to piracy or hostile 
warships. In such cases the pilot’s only recourse is to 
surrender or hope the small craft’s nimble maneuver 
drives can keep it away from the attacker long enough 
to get to safety.
Free Merchant
HP: 20 Power: 10/0 free
AC: 14 Mass: 15/0 free
Armor: 2 Crew: 1/6
Speed: 3 Hull Class: Frigate
Crew Skill: +1 NPC CP: 4
Weapons: Multifocal Laser (+3/1d4, AP 20)
Sandthrower (+3/2d4, Flak)
Defenses: None
Fittings:
Spike Drive-1, 160 tons of cargo space
Atmospheric Configuration
Fuel Scoops, Fuel Bunker
Cost: 775K base price, 38,750 maintenance, 
131,400 yearly crew cost for 3 crew
A mainstay of freebooting merchant-adventurers 
throughout human space, the standard free merchant 
is an extremely versatile craft, capable of hauling sig -
nificant amounts of cargo to neighboring systems while 
requiring very few hands to operate it. Only one crew 
member is needed for in-system flight, though spike 
drills require three for normal margins of safety.
The standard free merchant is not a warship, but 
its sandthrower is enough to discourage pirate shuttles 
and the other small or fragile craft that wreckers or 
primitive worlds tend to favor. The multifocal laser 
is ideal for a highly-skilled gunner who can snipe out 
important systems on an attacking vessel, but the ship 
lacks the armor and durability to stand up to a true war-
ship. Of course, with a sufficiently expert crew, even a 
corvette might be threatened by the well-aimed guns 
of a small craft like this.
===== PAGE 109 =====
examPle StarShiPS •105 
Patrol Boat
HP: 25 Power: 15/1 free
AC: 14 Mass: 10/0 free
Armor: 5 Crew: 5/20
Speed: 4 Hull Class: Frigate
Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5
Weapons: Plasma Beam (+4/3d6, AP 10)
Defenses: None
Fittings:
Spike Drive-2
Atmospheric Configuration
Extended Stores, Boarding Tubes
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Survey Sensors
Cost: 3.523M base price, 176K maintenance, 
657K yearly crew cost for 15 crew
Patrol boats are often the largest ships fielded by poor 
or backward frontier worlds that lack the shipyard fa-
cilities or available resources to build bigger military 
craft. Even so, the ability to field two patrol boats for 
the yearly maintenance cost of one corvette often ap-
peals even to richer worlds that need more coverage 
than their available craft can provide.
Patrol boats are the smallest independent warships 
fielded by most navies, as fighters are not normally 
considered capable of extended independent opera -
tion. They have considerable spike drive reach and are 
faster in-system than most of their potential targets. 
While their single mounted gun is vulnerable to being 
disabled by expert enemy gunners, the relatively thick 
armor of the ship and skilled damage control crew can 
mitigate that danger. A few patrol boats replace their 
survey sensor array with a sandthrower to up-gun the 
ship, but most prefer the additional edge in scanning 
potential smugglers.
Corvette
HP: 40 Power: 15/0 free
AC: 13 Mass: 15/0 free
Armor: 10 Crew: 10/40
Speed: 2 Hull Class: Frigate
Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5
Weapons: 2 Plasma Beams (+4/3d6, AP 10)
Sandthrower (+4/2d4, Flak)
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay
Fittings:
Spike Drive-2, Cargo Lighter
Extended Stores, Boarding Tubes
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Fuel Bunker
Cost: 5.973M base price, 298K maintenance
1.314M yearly crew cost for 30 crew
The usual ship of the line of most modestly-funded 
frontier navies, a corvette is a true warship, albeit of 
a minimal size. While it is unable to land on worlds 
with standard gravity, its cargo lighter allows crew and 
cargo transit from the surface of a world, and its ex -
tended stores allow for more than four months of field 
operation under normal crew parameters.
Most pirates flying reworked free merchants 
or stolen patrol boats will turn tail as soon as a cor -
vette shows up in the region. Good armor, multiple 
ship-killing guns, and trained boarding marines make 
a corvette a death sentence to most stellar ruffians, and 
even when a pirate wolf pack can bring one down, it 
usually comes at the cost of crippling damage.
The model depicted here is standard for anti-pi -
racy and basic system defense missions. Against cruis -
er-class warships, however, this corvette’s weapons 
have insufficient armor penetration to seriously threat-
en such a major warship.
Heavy Frigate
HP: 50 Power: 25/0 free
AC: 15 Mass: 20/0 free
Armor: 10 Crew: 30/120
Speed: 1 Hull Class: Frigate
Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5
Weapons: 2 Plasma Beams (+4/3d6, AP 10)
Torpedo (+4/3d8, AP 20, Ammo 4)
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay
Fittings:
Spike Drive-2, Drop Pod, 16 Torpedoes
Fuel Scoops, Fuel Bunker, Armory
Ship’s Locker, Boarding Tubes
Cost: 9.783M base price, 489K maintenance
3.942M yearly crew cost for 90 crew
Sometimes confusingly called a “light cruiser”, a heavy 
frigate pushes the engineering parameters of a frigate 
hull to the maximum available to most TL4 worlds. 
Equipped with a torpedo launcher capable of threat -
ening even cruiser-class enemies, the heavy frigate 
can intimidate any ship of its weight class. Its heavy 
crew complement and military drop pod fitting allow 
it to quickly dispatch well-armed marines to hot spots 
throughout a solar system.
However, despite the large weapon loadout, the 
heavy frigate remains a frigate. Its armor is significant-
ly inferior to that of a true cruiser-class warship, and 
most frigates built for same-class engagements can be 
a meaningful threat to it. It comes into its own as a 
bludgeon against the other small warships likely to be 
fielded by a peer star-faring polity.
===== PAGE 110 =====
106• examPle StarShiPS
Fleet Cruiser
HP: 60 Power: 50/4 free
AC: 14 Mass: 30/0 free
Armor: 15 Crew: 50/200
Speed: 1 Hull Class: Cruiser
Crew Skill: +2 NPC CP: 5
Weapons:
Gravcannon (+5/4d6, AP 20)
Smart Cloud (+5/3d10, Cloud, Clumsy)
2 Multifocal Laser (+5/1d4, AP 20)
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay
Fittings:
Spike Drive-3, Drop Pod
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Boarding Tubes
Fuel Scoops, Advanced Nav Computer
60 tons of cargo space
Cost: 17.17M base price, 858K maintenance
6.58M yearly crew cost for 150 crew
The archetypal warship of post-Silence humanity, the 
fleet cruiser is a ship-eating monster compared to its 
smaller brethren in the navy. Only prosperous polities 
can build such powerful ships, and even they some -
times find it more practical to have a flexible fleet of 
small craft rather than a few heavily-armed cruisers.
The chief advantage of a fleet cruiser is in its heav-
ily-armored hull. Only special hunter-killer ships fitted 
with armor-piercing weaponry have any real chance of 
penetrating the cruiser’s thick skin. Those weapons are 
almost always more bulky and power-hungry than their 
peer weapons, so enemy polities must usually choose 
between building small ships that are very effective at 
defeating other small ships, or building hunter-killers 
that can threaten cruisers but are at a disadvantage 
against their less specialized brethren.
Battleship
HP: 120 Power: 75/8 free
AC: 17 Mass: 50/0 free
Armor: 20 Crew: 200/1,000
Speed: 0 Hull Class: Capital
Crew Skill: +3 NPC CP: 6
Weapons:
Vortex Tunnel (+6/3d20, AP 20, Clumsy)
Light. Charge Mant. (+6/1d20, AP 5 Cloud)
2 Multifocal Lasers (+6/1d4, AP 20)
Gravcannon (+6/4d6, AP 20)
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay
Ablative Hull Compartments
Fittings:
Spike Drive-3, Drop Pod
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Boarding Tubes
Fuel Scoops, Advanced Nav Computer
Ship bay/Fighter w/Shuttle
Fuel Bunkers, 200 tons of cargo
Cost: 79.06M base price, 4M maintenance
35M yearly crew cost for 800 crew
Built off the biggest hull class that TL4 polities can 
create, only the richest modern worlds can afford to 
fabricate these massive engines of war. Even those 
worlds with adequate resources to do so often balk at 
expending such a tremendous amount of money on a 
single ship.
Those that do build battleships do so for a reason. 
The tremendous weight of fire these ships put out can 
pop a cruiser in a single firing pass, and its reinforced 
hull plating shrugs off all but the heaviest armor-pierc-
ing blows. Where cruisers often require hunter-killer 
frigates to take them out, battleships commonly require 
hunter-killer cruisers to disable them.
The main weakness of a battleship is the fact that it 
is only a single ship… a single, extremely expensive ship. 
It can only attack or defend a single location at a time, 
and an enemy that has the time and resources to build 
specialized anti-capital ships with AP weaponry and 
expendable crews can bring the battleship down for far 
less money than it cost to build it.
Bulk Freighter
HP: 40 Power: 10/2 free
AC: 11 Mass: 25/0 free
Armor: 0 Crew: 10/40
Speed: 0 Hull Class: Cruiser
Crew Skill: +1 NPC CP: 4
Weapons: Plasma Beam (+3/3d6, AP 10)
Defenses: None
Fittings:
Spike Drive-2, Cargo Lighter
Fuel Bunker, Ship’s Locker
3,400 tons of cargo space
Cost: 6.088M base price, 304K maintenance
657K yearly crew cost for 15 crew
Found only in rich, peaceful regions of space, the bulk 
freighter is capable of hauling thousands of tons of 
goods between star systems. While it’s equipped with 
enough of a sting to discourage small-ship piracy, it’s 
woefully inadequate to handle a warship, or even an 
up-gunned free merchant.
Some adventurers do find use for a bulk freighter 
hull, however, trading off some of its massive cargo 
space for more fittings and using customized modi -
fications to allow the ship to support heavier power 
demands. While the end result is no match for a true 
cruiser, the sheer mass of the freighter can make it a 
dangerous opponent in the right hands.
===== PAGE 111 =====
Building a Ship
A fortunate adventurer has won the favor of a pow-
erful shipping magnate, and has earned one million 
credits worth of astronautic work. The player thinks 
it’s an excellent chance to have a ship built to fit the 
adventuring party’s needs.
She starts by looking over the ship hulls and 
quickly sees that a free merchant hull is the best she 
can afford. A shuttle hull might work, but such a 
ship is too fragile for her liking. The hull itself costs 
500,000 credits and comes with a drive-1 spike drive.
It also has free Power and Mass scores of 10 and 
15 respectively. The player can fill that space with 
fittings and defenses as she wishes.
First, she looks at weaponry. She wants enough 
firepower to discourage small ships, but she can’t 
mount weapons that require a cruiser or capital hull, 
and a plasma beam is far too expensive. She could 
settle for a multifocal laser, which is cheap, but she 
decides to up-gun to a fractal impact charge, trusting 
in the party’s Warrior to aim it well. It costs 200k 
credits, 5 power, 1 mass, and 1 free hardpoint. It can 
store up to 8 charges in the launcher since a frig -
ate-class hull is one larger than the minimum needed 
to mount it. The charges themselves will cost her 
another 4,000 credits.
Next, she thinks about better engines. She brief-
ly considers a drive-3 upgrade, but it would take 4 
points of Power and Mass, leaving her almost no 
Power left for other fittings. She settles for a drive-2 
upgrade for 100k credits, 2 Power, and 2 Mass.
She takes a moment to think about adding some 
hardened polyceramic overlay to the merchant as a 
defense, but the ship’s Armor is so low that it doesn’t 
seem worth the effort to harden it.
The PCs will need to land, so she adds an atmo-
spheric configuration at 50k and 2 Mass. She wants 
fuel scoops so she doesn’t have to trust to local refuel-
ing stations, so that’s 50k, 2 Power, and 2 Mass. Pru-
dence recommends a fuel bunker in case she needs 
to drill out before refueling, adding 25k and 1 Mass.
She’s so far spent 929,000 credits, 9 Power, and 
8 Mass. To spare bookkeeping, she puts in a ship’s 
locker for 25k, but an armory is too expensive; the 
PCs will just have to track their own weapons and 
ammo. The remaining Mass is turned into 140 tons 
of cargo space. Thus, the final ship costs 954,000 
credits and uses 9 Power, and 15 Mass. At a rate of 
25,000 credits of shipyard work a day, it’ll take the 
yards about 39 days to build, giving the party time to 
think about how they’ll pay for maintenance…
examPle StarShiPS •107 
Carrier
HP: 95 Power: 50/9 free
AC: 14 Mass: 100/0 free
Armor: 10 Crew: 200/1,500
Speed: 0 Hull Class: Capital
Crew Skill: +3 NPC CP: 6
Weapons: Gravcannon (+6/4d6, AP 20)
Defenses: Hardened Polyceramic Overlay
Ablative Hull Compartments
Fittings:
Drive-3, Drop Pod, 1000 tons cargo
Armory, Ship’s Locker, Workshop
Fuel Scoops, Advanced Nav Computer
Lifeboats, Fuel Bunkers
20 Ship Bay/Fighter w/Fighters
5 Ship Bay/Frigate w/Corvettes
Cost: 126.88M base, 6.35M maintenance
43.8M yearly crew cost for 1,000 crew
The queen of every navy that has one, a carrier is the 
pinnacle of TL4 shipbuilding technology and a mas -
sive credit sink for any polity rich or desperate enough 
to build one. Every fully-equipped carrier holds more 
firepower than most modern navies can assemble, and 
a single carrier is more than enough to crush most TL4 
naval task forces.
The carrier itself is only the vector for its tremen-
dous payload of ships, both small fighters and cor -
vette-type daughter craft. The ability to quickly alter 
the flight wings of a carrier allows a rich planet to tailor 
its loadout to the specific needs of a campaign, wheth -
er it’s destroying the interstellar commerce and aster -
oid mines of an enemy polity or going head-to-head 
against their cruiser line of battle. Many polities further 
optimize their carrier-loaded ships by removing their 
spike drives and replacing them with system drives, re-
lying on the carrier to get them into position. Of course, 
if the mothership is destroyed in hostile territory, these 
orphans are doomed.
While a carrier has a belly full of death, the ship 
itself is lightly gunned and has significantly weaker 
armor than its battleship brethren. Any polity rich 
enough to build a carrier knows well enough to equip 
it with an escort of other ships to screen it from hos -
tile attentions. Lightly-armed as it is, a wing of fight -
er-bombers can leave it a burning hulk if it’s caught out 
without protection.
===== PAGE 112 =====
108• modifying and tuning StarShiPS
modIfyIng and TunIng sTarshIPs
Most ships are maintained in the condition they came 
from the shipyard, with the crew and the engineers 
working to keep things aligned with the shipwright’s 
specifications. Such rigid conformity with standard 
techniques ensures easy repair, cheap maintenance, and 
the ready ability to switch crews without requiring la-
borious retraining or familiarization. Not all engineers 
value these qualities so highly, however, and some pre-
fer to install their own improvements.
A ship’s engineer can alter the wiring, internal 
structure, or other specifications of a starship, either 
to improve overall performance or make tradeoffs that 
are useful to their needs. Making these modifications 
isn’t cheap, and they often require the strategic deploy-
ment of rare pretech ship components.
Engineers with sufficiently vast resources, ship -
yard access, and available pretech components can 
completely re-engineer a ship to integrate their im -
provements in the basic hull structure. These improve-
ments no longer require their special attention to keep 
them operational, allowing the engineer to focus on 
other modifications or allow less talented crewmen to 
keep the ship in fighting trim.
Mods and Maintenance
Every engineer has a Maintenance score, the same used 
for installing equipment mods as described on page 100. 
The score is equal to their Intelligence modifier plus 
their Constitution modifier plus three times their Fix 
score. Any mod maintenance is counted against this 
Maintenance score, whether for equipment or starships.
An engineer can maintain a number of mods at 
once equal to their Maintenance score. If a ship mod 
is neglected for one week of active use, it breaks down. 
Any fittings or functions dependent on the mod also 
become inoperable until a sufficiently skilled engineer 
spends at least 8 hours repairing the mod, a process 
which requires time but no significant additional parts. 
Ships parked at a station or landing strip don’t count 
as “active” for this purpose, so the ship’s engineer can 
go off for a week’s adventure or shore leave without 
returning to a broken-down starship.
More than one engineer can work to maintain a 
ship’s modifications, provided the maintenance officer 
has a Fix skill score as high as that needed to install the 
mod in the first place. This also assumes that the chief 
engineer and any assistants work together closely to 
properly teach the structure and quirks of the modifica-
tion. The difficulty of maintaining this close teamwork 
and sourcing exotic parts to maintain a non-standard 
modification is one reason why very few NPC ships 
have mods. While they’re possible for elite craft and 
idiosyncratic prototypes, most military ships or cor -
porate traders have too much of a logistical burden to 
support these odd alterations.
Installing Mods
Every starship mod requires a certain amount of refit -
ting work and after-market parts, along with a poten-
tial need for one or more pretech components. These 
pretech components are not normally for sale, and are 
usually found only through salvage during adventur -
ing or as rewards for favors performed for important 
personages. While they vary in structure and appear-
ance, for convenience’s sake it’s assumed that a given 
component can serve in installing any mod.
Building the mod can be done at a rate of one day’s 
work for the crew per 5,000 credits in mod cost, or 
one day per 25,000 credits if a shipyard’s services are 
available. Mods can also be torn out, a process taking 
less than a day that reclaims any pretech components 
used in their construction but wastes any credit invest-
ment in parts. 
Mod installation does not require a full shipyard, 
but it does assume the full crew of the ship is assisting 
the engineer in stripping components, welding in new 
fittings, and hauling heavy parts. A lone engineer can’t 
make mods to anything larger than a frigate-class hull, 
and that might take a week’s painstaking labor for every 
5,000 credits of cost.
Redesigning Ships
An engineer with vast amounts of money, components, 
and shipyard support can completely rebuild a ship hull 
to include a mod as part of its basic structure, or re -
design an existing hull schematic to include the mod. 
This is much more expensive than a quick after-market 
addition, but the mod becomes part of the basic ship 
itself and requires no further Maintenance.
To rebuild a ship with a mod, the engineer must 
spend five times the usual cost in credits and twice as 
many pretech components as usually required by the 
mod. A shipyard is mandatory for such extensive re-
design, and can do the work at a rate of 25,000 credits 
worth each day.
To build an entirely new hull that includes the mod 
as part of its design, only the normal price of the mod 
must be paid in credits and components. By integrating 
the modification into the ship’s basic blueprints, the 
engineer makes it much easier to install and maintain 
it. Of course, the entire hull must then be built from 
scratch at a shipyard, also at the usual rate of 25,000 
credits of work done per day.
There’s a limit to the amount of flexibility an engi-
neer has in such designs, however. A ship can only be 
rebuilt or redesigned with a number of mods equal to 
twice the engineer’s Fix skill score. Further mods can 
be bolted on afterwards, but these will require Main-
tenance to keep in operating order, just as with any 
other mod.
===== PAGE 113 =====
modifying and tuning StarShiPS •109 
Example Starship Mods
The following modifications aren’t the only alterations 
that a canny engineer can install on a starship, but 
they’re among the most common. Each one is listed 
with the minimum Fix skill required to install or main-
tain the mod.
The credit price for most is expressed in a per -
cent of the base hull cost; thus, to install a power trunk 
streamlining mod with a 10% cost in a free merchant 
hull would cost 50,000 credits, or 10% the cost of the 
base hull. In a battleship hull, that same mod would 
cost 6,000,000 credits.
The pretech component cost is given in compo -
nents per hull class. Thus, if a mod requires one com-
ponent per hull class, it would take one component for 
a fighter-class hull, two for a frigate, three for a cruiser, 
and four for a capital-class hull. These pretech compo-
nents are usually rare and restricted enough that they 
cannot be purchased on the open market. PCs need 
to find them during their adventures, acquire them 
through favors to powerful persons, or intentionally 
seek them out in salvage adventures.
Most mods can be installed only once, though a 
few of them labeled otherwise can be duplicated as far 
as the ship’s infrastructure can support them.
Cargo Efficiency Bays (Fix-1): The ship’s internal struc-
ture is adjusted to optimize available cargo space. 
The ship’s total free Mass is decreased by 10%, 
rounded up, but, each point of Mass dedicated to 
cargo space counts as two points. Cost: 10% of hull, 
1 component/hull class
Compact Magazines (Fix-1): The ship can carry twice 
as much ammunition as its available weapons and 
magazine space would normally allow. Cost: 5% 
of hull, no components
Drill Velocity Upgrade (Fix-2): The ship’s spike drive 
is counted as one level better when determining 
spike drill transit speed and maximum drill range, 
up to a maximum of drive-6. Cost: 10% of hull, 1 
component/hull class
Emergency Drill Activation (Fix-3): The ship can engage 
its spike drives even when in dangerous proximity 
to a planetary body. When engaged, it can drill out 
in a single round. Doing so increases the difficulty 
of any spike drive skill check by +2 if in-system or 
+4 if actually landed. Drilling out from the surface 
will destroy everything within 200 meters of the 
ship. The mod can be used only once every four 
weeks. Cost: 20% hull, 2 components/hull class
Emergency Thruster Boost (Fix-1): Retune the engines 
for emergency power. Once per space combat, 
gain a +2 bonus to Speed for three rounds. Cost: 
10% of hull, no components
Engine Optimization (Fix-2): The engines have been 
optimized for realspace maneuverability. The 
ship’s Speed increases by 1. Cost: 10% of hull, 1 
component/hull class
Eternal Reactor (Fix-2): The ship’s fuel tanks are re -
placed with effectively everlasting pretech energy 
cores. It no longer needs to refuel for drills or op-
eration. Cost: 5% of hull, 2 components/hull class
Extended Mass Support (Fix-1): The engineer trims back 
the power core to allow for more ship mass. Lose 
up to ten points of free Power; gain half as many 
points of free Mass, rounded down. This mod can 
be installed multiple times. Cost: 10% of hull, one 
component
Low Emissions (Fix-1): Any sensor checks to detect the 
ship have their difficulty increased by +2. Cost: 
10% of hull, 1 component/hull class
Nemesis Tracker (Fix-3): The ship’s targeting comput -
ers are augmented with pretech prediction soft -
ware. Once per ship combat, a gunner on the ship 
can take an Instant action to cause a weapon shot 
to hit, regardless of the hit roll. Cost: 5% of hull, 2 
components/hull class
Oversized Mountings (Fix-2): Choose a specific weapon 
or fitting that normally requires a hull size one 
step larger than the ship the mod is installed on. 
The ship can mount that fitting. Cost: 15% of hull, 
1 component/hull size
Power Trunk Streamlining (Fix-1): Sacrifice free hull 
space for superior power core efficiency. Lose up 
to five points of free Mass; gain twice as many 
points of free Power. This mod can be installed 
multiple times. Cost: 10% of hull, one component
Q-Ship Cladding (Fix-1): Some or all of ship’s weapons 
are concealed from external observation and stan-
dard scans when they are not deployed for combat. 
The ship itself can be made to look like a merchant 
or freighter of its size class. Cost: 5% of hull, no 
components
Regenerative Armor (Fix-3): The ship’s Armor score 
increases by 5 points. Cost: 15% of hull, 2 compo-
nents/hull class
Reinforced Armor (Fix-1): The ship’s Armor score in -
creases by the Fix skill of the installing engineer. 
The ship loses one point of Power and one point 
of Mass. Cost: 5% of hull
Specialized Mountings (Fix-1): Choose a specific weapon 
or fitting when this mod is installed. The chosen 
fitting requires only half the normal Power and 
Mass per fitting installation, rounded down to a 
minimum of 1. Cost: 10% of hull, no components
Volley Capacitors (Fix-2): The ship’s weaponry has been 
altered for rapid firing. Once per combat, the 
ship’s gunner gets 4 Command Points that must 
be spent on gunnery actions. Cost: 10% of hull, 
no components
Weapon Overcharge (Fix-2): One weapon of the en -
gineer’s choice has been overcharged. It requires 
50% more Power than a usual installation, but 
rolls its damage twice and takes the better result 
each time. This mod may be installed more than 
once. Cost: 5% of hull, no components
===== PAGE 114 =====
1 10• SPaCe travel
sPaCe TraVel
Interstellar travel takes place through metadimensional 
space, a higher-order continuum “understood” by only 
a handful of brilliant researchers and astronautic en -
gineers. Fortunately, it is not necessary to have an in-
tuitive understanding of the place in order to operate 
a spike drive starship. While modern postech spike 
drives are neither as powerful nor as efficient as the 
exquisite creations of the Terran Mandate, most TL4 
worlds can still put together the necessary components 
to get a ship from one stellar system to another.
Within the gravity well created by a stellar body, a 
spike drive provides sub-light propulsion sufficient to 
get the ship to most system locations within a few days 
at most. Only at the edge of a solar system, where the 
gravitic influence of the star dwindles away to almost 
nothing, can the spike drive be fully engaged to cata -
pult the ship into metadimensional space. This gravitic 
transition zone is critical for providing the necessary 
step-up and step-down for a spike drive. Without such 
a transition, a ship can neither climb into metadimen-
sional space nor come down from those elevated di -
mensional frequencies. Only a star is sufficient to pro-
vide enough of a gravitic gradient; random interstellar 
rocks and debris don’t exert enough of an influence to 
form a usable transition zone.
Ships are generally unable to “overshoot” a transi-
tion zone. If a ship is coming into a system from a spike 
drive course to the stellar northwest of the star, it will 
appear at the northwest edge of the solar system. Its 
pilot can’t choose to “overshoot” that region, traveling 
across the solar system to come down on the south -
eastern edge of the star’s transition zone. This property 
allows a solar system’s owner to fortify probable transit 
paths into the system, placing defenses and picket ships 
in the path of likely arrivals.
This can be a difficult and expensive process if the 
star is in a crowded stellar neighborhood. The transit 
paths from each potential destination are different; if 
a star has two other systems to its east, it has to fortify 
two different arrival zones if it wants to be confident 
of detecting incoming ships from both stars. If an ex-
ceptionally powerful spike drive allows an intruder to 
drill in from a more-distant star, the local polity might 
have no local sensors at all in the region, having never 
anticipated that a ship might come directly from such 
a distant location.
These relatively-fixed arrival zones only apply 
to ships arriving at a star. A ship can leave from any 
location on the rim, traveling toward any destination 
within reach of its spike drive. Thus, a ship that’s able 
to skulk past a system’s frontier sensors can usually find 
an empty region of space in the transition zone to skip 
out undetected. It also has no obligation to be on the 
“correct side” of the star to go leaping off toward a par-
ticular stellar destination.
Making Spike Drills
Interstellar spike drills are dangerous. Some sectors 
have the technology and friendly-enough metadimen-
sional weather to make standard drill paths relatively 
safe for travel. Ships in these favored sectors can move 
between connected worlds with no significant chance 
of disaster. Other sectors are not so fortunate, nor are 
those ships that must forge through uncharted meta -
dimensional space to reach their destination. Careless 
navigation or sheer bad luck can result in these ships 
being snuffed out by an unexpected surge of metadi -
mensional energy or lost in the storms of hyperdimen-
sional space.
To make a successful spike drill, the target system 
must be within range. A spike drive has a hex range 
equal to its rating; a drive-3 can reach a star three hexes 
away on the sector map. Note that these sector maps 
are abstractions rather than strict 2D maps. A star three 
hexes away might be a vast distance away, but connect-
ed by a friendly stretch of metadimensional space. Con-
versely, an “empty” adjacent hex might have a star in 
it, but it’s surrounded by killing waves of impenetrable 
dimensional disruption. Because of this, convention -
al astronomical mapping isn’t overly useful to transit. 
The astronomers might know that there’s a star only a 
few light years away, but if the navigators can’t find a 
metadimensional path to it, it might as well be on the 
far side of the galaxy.
A spike drill requires one load of fuel. Most ships 
can hold a single load of fuel at any one time. All can 
be refueled from the appropriate refineries or starport 
tending services, while others can use fuel scoop fit -
tings to refuel from a star or gas giant. Other ships 
have fuel bunkers that can hold more than one load of 
fuel, for quick double-drills when speed is vital. Normal 
intra-system maneuvering uses no significant amount 
of fuel, and refueling costs a flat 500 credits per load.
A spike drill requires time. A safe drill procedure 
requires half an hour to enter metadimensional space, 
though this process can be rushed at greater risk. The 
transit time is six days per hex traveled, divided by the 
spike drill rating. Thus, a drive-3 crossing two hexes 
would take four days, while a drive-1 moving to an 
adjacent hex would take six days. Daring navigators 
can “trim the course”, accepting greater risks in transit 
in order to increase their effective drive rating by 1 for 
purposes of determining the speed of travel, though 
this bonus doesn’t increase the drive’s maximum range.
A spike drill needs a course record, or “rutter” to 
guide the pilot. Ideally, this is an up-to-date and recent 
record of the metadimensional currents and energetic 
weather between the origin and destination of their 
course, one reported by a recent traveler. The older and 
staler the readings of the rutter, the more dangerous 
===== PAGE 115 =====
SPaCe travel • 111  
the drill. Most rutters for commonly-traveled routes 
are freely available, and significant trade corridors 
usually have ones only a few days old available to any 
pilot making the drill. Rutters charting heretofore-un-
known paths between stars are often kept jealously se-
cret by their owners, and may require an adventure or 
a favor to obtain.
Attempting to drill to a star without any rutter 
at all is insanely dangerous, the work of near-suicidal 
crew of adventurers willing to risk everything in order 
to obtain a secret route to some hopefully-unplundered 
world. Only a masterful interstellar navigator has any 
real hope of surviving such a blind drill.
Finally, a spike drill needs a pilot. Only a human 
or other sentient-grade intellect is capable of dealing 
with the dangerously unpredictable perils of metadi -
mensional space, as expert systems and other “dumb” 
robots simply can’t handle the random dangers. Most 
ships require at least three crew members to cover all 
the bridge watches necessary, though only one of these 
crew needs to be an actual pilot. In desperate circum -
stances, a lone pilot can use drugs to stay awake for as 
much as a week in order to single-handedly steer a ship 
to its destination.
If all these ingredients are in place and the ship 
is at the edge of the solar system, a ship’s navigator 
can make an Int/Pilot skill check to make a successful 
spike drill, the process taking 30 minutes. If rushed, 
it takes only one ship combat round to execute. The 
base difficulty is 7, modified by the available rutter, the 
distance drilled, rushed procedures, and whether or not 
the navigator is trimming the course to speed up the 
transit. If the final difficulty is 6 or less, the drill is too 
safe and simple to have any risk of failure.
 
If the roll fails, something has gone wrong on 
the drill, and a roll on the failed navigation results are 
necessary. These mishaps don’t normally result in the 
summary death of the crew, but they often force the 
navigator to make emergency course changes or drill 
exits that might leave the ship in a dangerously un -
friendly region of space.
Intra-System Travel
Traveling inside a solar system is much safer and more 
rapid than interstellar travel. Barring unusual perils or 
mechanical failure, such journeys can be made without 
Pilot skill checks or risk of dramatic mishaps.
For convenience, space within a solar system is 
broken up in regions. Each region is simply a place of 
interest within the system; planets are regions, fortified 
arrival zones are regions, particular pirate lairs in the 
asteroid belts are regions, and so forth. Any particular 
place of interest and its satellite areas can be treated as 
a single region.
The base travel time for moving inside a region is 
six hours. Thus, in six hours a ship could travel from a 
planetary starport to a site on the planet’s moon, or to 
a distant science station orbiting around the planet, or 
to a distress beacon in space near that world. Any place 
within that region can be reached within six hours, or 
faster at the GM’s discretion.
The base travel time for moving between regions 
is forty-eight hours. A ship in orbit around one planet 
could thus travel to an entirely different planet, or to 
the transition zone at the rim of the system, or to a 
ship detected deep within system space, or to an aster-
oid pirate base, or to any other point of interest in the 
solar system.
Base travel time is divided by the ship’s spike drive 
rating. Thus, a ship with drive-3 could reach another 
region in the system in only 16 hours. Bold navigators 
can “trim the course” to increase their effective spike 
drive rating by 1 by making a successful Pilot check at 
difficulty 9. On a failure, the travel actually takes twice 
as long as usual.
Spike Drills
Base difficulty for a spike drill 7
The course is totally uncharted +6
The rutter’s more than 5 years old +2
The rutter’s from 1 to 5 years old +1
The rutter’s less than a year old +0
The rutter’s less than a month old -2
The drill’s distance, per 2 full hexes +1
Trimming the course +2
The drill activation was rushed +2
3d6 Spike Drill Mishap
3 Catastrophic dimensional energy incursion. 
Ship emerges around a star within 1d6 
hexes of the target destination with drive 
and all systems destroyed.
4-5 Shear surge overwhelms internal systems. 
Ship emerges around star nearest to drill 
origin. 50% chance for each system to be 
disabled until repaired. If the spike drive is 
disabled, treat as if a 3 were rolled.
6-8 Power spike. One system disabled until 
repaired, ship stuck in transit for full base 
time before being able to make another 
Pilot check. If the spike drive fails, treat as if 
a 3 were rolled.
9-12 Ship off course. Spend base time in transit, 
then make another Pilot check.
13-16 Ship off course, but detected early. Make 
another Pilot check.
16-17 Drill successful, but takes twice base time.
18 Drill successful and on time, by blind luck.
===== PAGE 116 =====
1 1 2• SenSorS and deteCtion
sensors and deTeCTIon
Adventurers often find it necessary to be very discreet 
about their comings and goings within a solar system, 
as do pirates, hostile warships, smugglers, and other 
nefarious sorts. Space is wide and dark, and if a ship is 
careful to avoid inhabited regions it can often escape 
notice by a system’s inhabitants.
Hiding and Seeking
As a general matter it is very difficult to spot a ship in 
deep space when it doesn’t wish to be spotted. Once a 
ship’s energy signature is identified, however, it be -
comes much easier to follow the ship’s movement; such 
a positional fix is called a detection lock, and once a ship 
has been locked by an observer it can be tracked at any 
distance in the system.
Fixing a lock on a target requires the observer to 
be in the same region of space and to win an opposed 
Int/Program skill check against the ship’s comms of -
ficer. If the observer wins the opposed roll, they get a 
detection lock on the ship. If they lose or tie, they re-
main oblivious to the ship’s presence and can try again 
in 24 hours. The active sensors used to form a detection 
lock can be detected by the target; they know they’ve 
been made. If the observing ship uses passive sensors, 
the lock is undetectable, but it’s more difficult to obtain.
The observer takes bonuses and penalties to their 
opposed skill check based on the circumstances as listed 
below. This can alter their die roll substantially, and 
make concealment almost impossible for ships not 
specially equipped for stealth. The modifiers below are 
common ones, but particular regions of space may have 
their own hazards or complications, with some making 
detection so difficult that they become favorite lairs for 
pirates and malcontents.
The larger the ship, the better the sensors it will 
have, but the easier it is to spot it in space. Minor out-
posts would reflect small deep-space habs or listening 
posts, while major space stations would include most 
military stations and other significant fortifications. 
Ships that carefully avoid population centers when 
landing on a world can mitigate some of the danger of 
a planetary sensor network, leaving smugglers and pi-
rates to prefer landing in remote, little-inhabited areas.
To break a lock, a tracked ship needs to leave the 
region. As soon as it does, the observer and the ship 
repeat their opposed skill check. If the observer wins, 
it continues to track the ship, while a tie or loss means 
the ship slips the lock. Any observers in the destination 
region can attempt to pick up the ship immediately and 
then once every 24 hours, but the original observer is 
out of luck. Provided a ship is willing to escape to the 
region of deep space above or below the solar ecliptic, 
it’s extremely unlikely that there’ll be anything there to 
spot them. Of course, such escape also means staying 
clear of potential refuges. A ship that flees to the “edge 
of the system” region can drill out to safety from there, 
and unless they pick a chunk of the rim monitored 
by the locals, they can do so with impunity. Very few 
worlds can monitor the entire system perimeter.
When rolling for observation, only roll once for 
any given group, outpost, or planet, using the best 
modifiers available. Thus, if a battle squadron includ-
ing a cruiser and three frigates rolls to observe, the 
GM would use the skill bonus and +2 modifier for the 
cruiser’s crew. If a separate pirate ship was in the same 
region, the GM would roll for them as well, because 
they’re a separate force in the region.
Pursuit and Escape
Adventurers have a habit of drawing unfriendly atten-
tion from hostile ships. While escape from a combat 
engagement is a matter of maneuver jets and good pi-
loting, long-range chases rely more on a ship’s spike 
drives to provide raw motive power.
A pursuer must be in the same region of space to 
pursue and must have a detection lock. Of course, if the 
pursued lacks a detection lock on the pursuer, they’ll 
have no idea that they’re being chased.
Both ships make Int/Pilot opposed skill checks, 
each adding their spike drive rating to the roll. If the 
pursuer wins or ties, they force an engagement and 
the ships are moved into combat range. If the pursued 
ship wins, it gets six hours of distance, modified by any 
difference in spike drive ratings; a drive-1 ship being 
chased by a drive-2 ship would have three hours, for 
example. It can use this time to reach a particular point 
inside the region, or can put it toward an attempt to 
escape the region entirely. Ships with spike drive-1 en-
gines need 48 hours to enter a new region, so they are 
unlikely to avoid a determined pursuer; one with spike 
drive-3, on the other hand, can make the escape in only 
16 hours. Some pilots may attempt to speed this up by 
trimming their course.
A pursuing ship can also use this six hours to aim 
toward a different region, if it thinks it knows where 
the ship is running. Assuming they can keep the detec-
tion lock when the pursued ship slips over the sub-stel-
lar border, they can end up close on their prey’s heels.
Observer is... Mod Target Ship is... Mod
Fighter +0 Fighter +3
Frigate +1 Frigate +2
Cruiser +2 Cruiser +1
Capital +3 Capital +0
Minor Outpost +2 Station -2
Major Station +4 Avoiding planetary 
population centers
+2
Planet +5
Passive sensors -2
===== PAGE 117 =====
Sneaking In
The free merchant Grendel has just drilled into a 
new system using charts her captain stole from an 
unfortunate pirate. 
As it happens, a small pirate base is positioned 
in the region, placed there by its inhabitants to 
keep an eye on any traffic from the adjacent sys -
tem. They get a chance to detect the Grendel, and 
roll the pirate comm officer’s skill bonus of +2 plus 
another +2 for being a minor outpost, and a -2 
for using passive sensors to avoid alerting targets. 
Their total is 12. The Grendel’s comms officer is 
good, however, and gets a +2 for being a frig -
ate-class ship. His Int/Program skill roll is a 13, 
meaning the base has not detected the ship.
Now the free merchant gets a chance to spot 
the station, also using passive sensors at a -2 pen-
alty. The outpost is a very visible space station, and 
takes -2 on its opposed roll, while the frigate gains 
a +1 on its check. The base rolls a 7 and the Grendel 
rolls an 8. The frigate has a detection lock on the 
pirate base.
Her captain decides to sneak further into the 
system. She can’t be sure the station hasn’t spotted 
her, but it’s made no obvious sign of it and she 
wants to investigate the local planets and their in-
habitants. The Grendel’s drive-2 engine can cross 
over to a planet’s region with 24 hours of travel. 
This will give the station one more chance 
to lock the ship, since it can try again in 24 hours. 
Even if it does successfully lock the free merchant, 
however, the captain bets they can lose it when 
they transfer out of the solar region. The pirate 
base might broadcast an alert to any other local al-
lies, however, which could make things awkward.
SenSorS and deteCtion •1 13 
Scanning Planets and Ships
Short-range scans of ships and planetary objects are rel-
atively simple affairs. Any scan of a ship within combat 
range will reveal the ship’s hull type, obvious weaponry 
and damage, and registered ID code. A scan of a planet 
in orbit will always reveal basic information on atmo-
sphere, geology, advanced energy-using surface com -
munities, other ships in orbit, and any surface features 
designed to attract orbital interest. 
Comms officers can attempt to interrogate the 
scans, asking one question before rolling an Int/Pro -
gram skill check against difficulty 8. On a success, the 
question is answered, while a failure means that the 
data is inconclusive and no further questions can be 
asked of it that day. Each question after the first suc -
cess that same day is asked at a cumulative +1 difficulty 
modifier. Questions should be simple and direct.
When scanning a ship, a comms officer might 
ask whether particular fittings or weapons have been 
mounted, where good boarding points might be on the 
hull, whether the ship looks to be the product of a par-
ticular world or culture, or simply to question wheth -
er anything looks odd about the ship’s readings. The 
sensors can probe a meter or so beneath the hull skin, 
but they can’t intrude on a ship’s computer network or 
provide a map of interior spaces.
When scanning a planet, a comms officer can ask 
about apparent capitals or spaceports, major industrial 
sites, unusual planetary weather patterns, unique aller-
gens or atmospheric hazards, current local news trans-
missions, or identify hidden or low-tech communities 
that are large but do not have clear energy signatures.
If they have the Survey Sensor Array fitting, they 
can do orbital visual spying accurate enough to read 
newsprint, in addition to asking questions about sub-
terranean spaces, visible surface life forms of interest, 
crude maps of the interior spaces, and interesting en-
ergy readings.
maInTenanCe and rePaIr
Ships are expensive things to keep flying, and many 
adventuring crews find themselves taking somewhat 
dubious work just to get enough money to keep their 
ship in the air.
Spares, Repairs and Refueling
Most ships have their repairs and maintenance done at 
a shipyard, but a ship can perform field maintenance 
and repair if they have the necessary parts. One ton of 
cargo space can hold 10,000 credits worth of spare parts. 
Any time required is quadrupled, however.
Ship fuel costs a flat 500 credits per load.
Six-Month Maintenance
Every ship needs to spend 5% of its total non-crew cost 
every six months in order to pay for basic maintenance. 
Each such period that is skipped applies a -1 penalty to 
all ship skill checks and hit rolls. At -4, the ship gains a 
10% chance per month of breaking down entirely until 
backlogged maintenance is repaired. At a shipyard, this 
maintenance takes a day for a fighter hull, a week for a 
frigate or cruiser, and a month for a capital ship.
Repairing Hulls and Systems
Fixing ship hit points can be done at a cost of 1,000 
credits per point, with up to the presiding engineer’s 
Fix skill repaired in points each day. A disabled sys -
tem can be jury-rigged back to functionality for one-
tenth the system’s cost and one day’s work per 25,000 
credits so spent. A jury-rigged system that is disabled 
again is destroyed. Full repairs of a disabled system cost 
one-quarter of its original price.
Repairs made during combat do not need to be 
re-done or paid for afterwards, as they were performed 
before the damage could become critical and lasting.
===== PAGE 118 =====
1 14• SPaCe Combat
sPaCe CombaT
The clash of ships in the void, the flash of silent ex -
plosions and soundless death… these things are famil-
iar to interstellar adventurers, and a natural hazard of 
the profession. While most adventurers seek to avoid 
such hull-melting conflagrations of war, sometimes the 
choice is not their own. When two or more ships close 
to combat range with the intent to kill, it’s time to fight.
The Combat Round
Space combat begins with a normal initiative roll, one 
made by each ship involved in the combat. Each rolls 
1d8 modified by the Intelligence or Dexterity modifier 
of the pilot, and they take their turns in order, with 
PCs winning ties. Once every ship has had a turn, the 
round starts over from the top. Initiative is not rerolled. 
A round of ship combat takes about 15 minutes, but 
Experts and Warriors can only use their special class 
abilities to reroll skill checks or ensure automatic hits 
once per engagement.
On its turn, a ship’s captain decides in which order 
its various departments will act: bridge, gunnery, en-
gineering, comms, and captain. Each department then 
chooses actions, choosing either from their specific 
department or a general action available to all depart-
ments. A department head can choose actions from 
only one category; they can’t pick from both. Some of 
these actions generate Command Points, allowing other 
departments to spend these points taking actions that 
require them. When all departments have acted, the 
next ship in order can go.
If the ship is an NPC ship, the GM can abbrevi -
ate the process, giving it a fixed number of Command 
Points based on its general crew quality, with the ship 
being able to take whatever actions it needs using that 
total. Fighters and civilian ships usually have 4 Com -
mand Points, military or pirate ships have 5, native 
spacers and highly-trained warships have 6, and the 
finest NPC crews in space can muster 7 points.
Ship Departments
For purposes of interstellar combat, every ship is as -
sumed to have five departments: bridge, gunnery, en-
gineering, comms, and captain. A ship with too few 
crew to actually man these departments may have to 
double-up on staffing, but these five functions are the 
ones that are critical during space combat, and every 
ship has to be able to act on them.
The bridge is where the ship’s piloting and naviga-
tion is done. This might be no more than the cramped 
cockpit of a starfighter or it might be a cavernous cen-
tral control node in the bowels of a battleship. The 
bridge department handles attempts to escape combat, 
perform evasive maneuvers, or pursue a fleeing enemy.
The gunnery department is in charge of the ship’s 
weaponry. If it’s used to blow pieces out of something 
unfriendly, it’s in the charge of the gunners who man 
this department. They’re the ones who fire a ship’s guns 
and make the targeting calculations necessary to snipe 
specific systems and weapons on a hostile target.
Engineering keeps the ship flying when enemies 
are carving chunks out of her hull. They can perform 
damage control, boost the engines to speed a ship’s ma-
neuvers, and execute emergency repairs to get a dam -
aged system back online before it’s too late.
The comms department doesn’t just handle in -
ter-ship communications, but it also manages sensors, 
electronic warfare, and combat hacking duties. Their 
crew can baffle enemy targeting attempts, fool hostile 
sensors, and choke enemy computers with ECM.
The captain is master of the ship and directs the 
other departments. On a warship, this discipline might 
be taut and automatic. On a ship piloted by PCs, obe-
dience may be less certain. Regardless, the captain can 
boost the effectiveness of other departments, direct 
crew for perilous but necessary tasks, or convert oth -
erwise-crippling hits into more manageable crises.
For player-run ships, every PC should be put in 
charge of one of these departments, preferably the one 
that best suits their character’s skills. If a PC is totally 
incompetent for space combat, they can be given tem-
porary control of the NPC officer who actually is in 
charge of the department, and can run that NPC as 
their character during the fight. If the ship is so small 
that there is no NPC available to run the department, 
then the PC is treated as a supernumerary officer, and 
can only take actions from the general action list avail-
able to all departments.
Sometimes there are fewer PCs than there are de-
partments. In that case, double-up the duties of two 
or more departments on a single PC. That PC can 
still only take actions from one departments per turn; 
any departments they don’t take an action from are 
assumed to use the Do Your Duty action, adding 1 Com-
mand Point to the ship’s available total. Thus, if a PC 
was in charge of both the bridge and the comms, she 
could take actions either from the bridge list, the com-
ms list, or the general list of actions. If she didn’t pick 
any action from the bridge or comms list, the neglected 
department would simply use Do Your Duty to add +1 
Command Point to the ship’s available total. For a sin-
gle-seat fighter, the lone crewman might have all five 
departments on his head. Such a pilot would be able to 
take actions from any single department each round 
with the other four providing 4 Command Points to 
fuel that action.
Sometimes the PCs may want to swap depart -
ments in mid-battle for some reason, or to replace a 
department head who has been incapacitated. They 
may do so at the start of any given combat turn pro -
vided that the department heads involved do not object.
===== PAGE 119 =====
SPaCe Combat •1 15 
Actions and Command Points
At the start of every ship’s turn, the captain decides the 
order in which the departments will take their action. 
In the chaos of combat, she can give directions to the 
heads, but they are not obligated to follow them.
When a department’s turn comes up, the PC in 
charge chooses actions, either from their department 
list or the general action list. Some actions may re -
quire skill checks to execute properly, while others are 
automatically successful. Some actions may require 
Command Points to be spent in order to attempt them, 
while others give Command Points. A few prohibit the 
PC from doing any other action that round.
Barring these actions, a department head can take 
as many actions as they have Command Points to spend 
on them. A gunnery chief with 4 Command Points, for 
example, could use the Fire One W eapon action twice, 
spending 2 Command Points each time, or he could 
use the Fire All Guns action once, spending 3 Command 
Points and leaving 1 left. The department head does not 
need to get permission to spend points from the rest of 
the crew; if he decides to burn the points to open fire 
when the rest of the crew wanted him to save them, 
that’s too bad for the rest of the crew. A traitorous or 
uncooperative department head can only be stopped 
by PC intervention with the Deal With a Crisis action.
After every department has acted, all excess Com-
mand Points are lost. Ships normally start their turns 
with 0 Command Points.
Attacks and Damage
When a ship fires a weapon, it can choose any target 
involved in the combat. Either the gunnery department 
head, an NPC, or a nominated PC may make the attack, 
but a given gunner can man only one gun a round. The 
gunnery head is always the one to spend Command 
Points to fire, but their nominees may be the ones ac-
tually manning the guns and rolling the attacks.
The gunner rolls a normal hit roll, using their 
base attack bonus plus the better of their Intelligence 
or Dexterity mods, plus their Shoot skill. If flying a 
fighter-class ship, Pilot may be used in place of Shoot. 
Foci that normally give bonuses to Shoot attacks, such 
as Gunslinger, do not apply to ship combat unless specif-
ically noted as doing so. The luck ability of the Warrior 
class may be used once per fight to hit with ship guns, 
but cannot be used to negate a hit against their ship.
If the hit roll equals or exceeds the target ship’s 
Armor Class, the attack is a success and the attacker 
may roll damage, again modified by the better of the 
gunner’s Intelligence or Dexterity modifiers. This dam-
age is lessened by the target’s Armor score, which may 
in turn be negated by a gun’s Armor-Piercing quality. 
A successful hit by a plasma beam, for example, does 
3d6 damage plus the gunner’s attribute modifier, with 
an Armor Piercing quality of 10. Against a free mer -
chant with an Armor score of 2, the full damage of the 
beam gets through, as the AP 10 cancels out all the 
merchant’s Armor. 
===== PAGE 120 =====
Running a Crisis
When a Crisis hits a ship, the GM should describe 
it in a concrete way. A Crew Lost crisis, for example, 
may be described as “A damage control squad has 
been trapped in the engine room and tempera -
tures are rising dangerously high.” A Hull Breach 
might be described as “That last hit drove a sup-
port column through a capacitor bank; it’s about 
to explode.” It should be described as a specific 
problem that threatens the ship.
In turn, when a PC chooses to Deal With a 
Crisis, they should indicate what it is exactly that 
they’re trying to do. A PC with Fix might declare 
that they’re trying to pump coolant into the en -
gine room, or a telekinetic PC might try to forcibly 
eject the capacitor bank before it can explode.
Don’t worry about being too technically pre-
cise with descriptions, or painstakingly deciding 
whether the ship has available coolant supplies 
or whether the capacitor is one ton or two. De -
cide whether or not the plan the PC is declaring 
is plausible or not in the general sense, and set the 
difficulty accordingly.
Extremely good plans or applicable abilities 
might make the Crisis resolution check as easy as 
difficulty 8, while a very marginal plan that doesn’t 
seem likely to help might be difficulty 12. What -
ever you do, keep it quick; don’t drag it out in play.
1 16• SPaCe Combat
Armor can negate all damage from a hit if it’s 
strong enough. If Armor completely negates the attack, 
the hit cannot disable systems.
Sufficiently skilled gunners can use the Target Sys-
tem action to aim a shot at a particular weapon system, 
engine, or other fitting that seems vulnerable to the 
GM. On such a hit, the damage is halved, rounded up, 
before Armor is applied. If any damage gets through, 
that system is disabled and cannot be used until it is 
repaired. Engines lose one drive rank instead, so that 
a drive-2 spike drive becomes a drive-1 until repaired. 
Disabled systems hit again or drives reduced below 
drive-0 are destroyed, and cannot be repaired during 
combat. A ship with destroyed engines cannot perform 
any bridge actions and may be boarded at an attacking 
ship’s leisure, assuming its guns are also disabled.
If a ship is reduced to zero hit points, fighter-class 
hulls are instantly destroyed with all hands. Larger 
ships are mortally damaged. Such crippled ships can 
take no action and will explode within 2d6 minutes 
unless the chief engineer succeeds in an Int/Fix skill 
check against difficulty 10. On a failure, the explosion is 
inevitable, while on a success the ship merely becomes 
a burnt-out hulk with all systems destroyed. If suffi-
ciently vast amounts of repair supplies are still intact in 
the hold, a determined crew might be able to jury-rig 
the maimed ship into temporary operation.
Ship Crises
Instead of accepting some particularly gruesome hit or 
disabling attack, a PC ship can instead choose to accept 
a Crisis. The attack or the disabling hit is then negated, 
with no damage done. Instead, the GM rolls on the 
Crisis table to find out what dire event happened as 
a consequence of the hit, instead of the ship damage.
Some of these Crises are continuing. They will 
continue to plague the ship until a PC can solve them 
with the Deal With a Crisis general action. Usually this 
involves a skill check at difficulty 10, but multiple PCs 
can choose to take the Deal With a Crisis  action to co-
operate in resolving the problem that round.
Some of these Crises are acute. The PCs must re-
solve them before the end of the ship’s next turn or else 
something very bad will happen.
A ship can accept only one Crisis per round, not 
including the Into the Fire or Keep it Together captain 
actions which may be taken at the captain’s discretion. 
Thus, if the ship is hit twice, only one of those hits can 
be converted into a Crisis unless the captain uses one 
of these actions. A ship accepts a Crisis if any of the 
department heads requests it, even if the rest of the 
heads don’t want one. Thus, if the ship’s main gun is hit, 
the gunnery chief can request a Crisis to prevent the hit 
even if the rest of the crew was against it.
To simplify ship combat, NPC ships do not nor -
mally accept more than one Crisis per space combat, 
at most. They usually just take the damage or negative 
effects of hits straight until facing imminent ruin.
Handling Crises
To resolve a Crisis, a PC needs to take the Deal With 
a Crisis general action on their department turn. They 
must explain what they are doing to solve the problem 
to the GM, who will then tell them what combination 
of attribute and skill they should roll. The usual diffi-
culty of resolving a crisis is 10, though the GM may 
increase or decrease that difficulty by up to 2 points 
either way depending on how bad the Crisis is and how 
useful the PC’s plan is to resolve it.
If the PC succeeds in the roll, the Crisis is ended. 
Continuing Crises no longer apply their penalty to the 
ship, and acute Crises are defused before disaster can 
strike. If they fail, a continuing Crisis is unchanged and 
an acute one is yet unresolved.
More than one PC can try to resolve a Crisis, either 
making an independent attempt if they have a relevant 
skill, or using their talents to aid the main responder 
with the usual rules for aiding another’s skill check.
The Deal With a Crisis  general action can also be 
used to get a scene’s worth of general activity aboard 
the ship. If a xenomorphic monster suddenly breaches 
the ship’s hull during a battle with its alien mothership, 
two of the PCs might take the Deal With a Crisis action 
to spend a scene battling the beast in the guts of the ship 
while the rest of the party tries to keep the ship fighting.
===== PAGE 121 =====
SPaCe Combat •1 1 7 
shIP CombaT aCTIons
Every PC can take one or more actions per ship round. 
PCs who are department heads can pick actions from 
their department. Any PC can pick from the general 
actions. Some actions prohibit any other act that round.
Most actions have a cost in Command Points. 
Usually, some PCs choose to Do Your Duty or go Above 
and Beyond to generate Command Points, while others 
then spend them on actions for their department. All 
unspent Command Points are lost at the round’s end.
NPC ships usually have a base number of Com -
mand Points they can spend each round, and may pick 
actions freely to spend them. For simplicity, NPC ships 
can’t usually generate more Command Points with 
their actions and can’t normally take Captain actions.
Bridge Actions
Escape Combat (4 CP): Roll an opposed Int/Pilot or Dex/
Pilot skill check plus your ship’s Speed against the 
fastest opponent’s skill check plus their ship’s 
Speed. On a win, all enemy ships gain one point 
of Escape. If an enemy ship gets three points, after 
three uses of this maneuver, your ship gets away 
from that ship and is no longer in combat with it.
Evasive Maneuvers (2 CP): Roll Int or Dex/Pilot against 
difficulty 9 to add your Pilot skill to the ship’s AC 
until its next turn.  Usable once per round at most.
Pursue Target (3 CP): Opposed Int/Pilot or Dex/Pilot 
skill check plus Speed against the target ship’s skill 
check plus Speed. On a win, you shed one point 
of Escape rating the target ship may have on you.
Captain Actions
Into the Fire (0 CP): Accept a Crew Lost Crisis and gain 
your Lead skill plus one in Command Points. You 
may do this at most once per round.
Keep It Together (0 CP): Nullify a successful enemy hit 
and roll a Crisis instead. You can use this action 
in Instant response to an enemy hit but you may 
only use it once per round.
Support Department (0 CP): Choose a department. One 
action that department takes will require 2 fewer 
Command Points. You can do this once per round.
Comms Actions
Crash Systems (2 CP): Roll an opposed Int/Program 
check against a targeted ship. On a success, it starts 
its next turn with a Command Point penalty equal 
to your Program skill.
Defeat ECM (2 CP): Roll an opposed Int/Program 
against a targeted ship. On a success, any attacks 
this round by your ship against the target get a hit 
bonus equal to twice your Program skill.
Sensor Ghost (2 CP): Succeed on a difficulty 9 Int/Pro-
gram check to gain your Program as an AC bonus 
until the next turn. Usable once per round at most.
Engineering Actions
Boost Engines (2 CP): Roll Int/Fix versus difficulty 8. On 
a success, the ship’s Speed is increased by 2 until 
the start of the ship’s next turn.
Damage Control (3 CP): Roll Int/Fix versus difficulty 
7. On a success, repair a number of lost hit points 
equal to your Fix skill times 2 for fighter hulls, 3 
for frigates, 4 for cruisers, and 6 for capital-class 
hulls. Each attempt of this action after the first in 
a fight increases its difficulty by a cumulative +1.
Emergency Repairs (3 CP): Roll Int/Fix versus difficulty 
8. On a success, a disabled system is repaired or 
a damage-degraded drive has its rating increased 
by 1. Destroyed systems cannot be fixed this way.
Gunnery Actions
Fire All Guns (3 CP): Gunners fire all weapons mounted 
on the ship, designating targets as they wish.
Fire One Weapon (2 CP): A gunner fires a single ship’s 
weapon of their choice.
Target Systems (1 CP): A Fire One W eapon action you 
take this round may target a ship’s weapons, en -
gine, or fittings the GM decides are vulnerable. 
Such targeted attacks take -4 to hit. On a hit, do 
half damage before applying Armor. If damage 
gets through the system is disabled or drive is 
degraded by 1 level. Disabled systems hit again 
are destroyed. You may take this action more than 
once to aim additional shots you may fire.
General Actions
All these general actions are exclusive; if you take one 
of these actions you can do nothing else in the round, 
either before or after you take the action.
Above and Beyond (0 CP): Push yourself to help the ship 
or its crew. Pick an attribute and skill check and 
explain how you’re using it to help the ship. If the 
GM agrees, roll it against difficulty 9. On a success, 
gain your skill level in Command Points plus one. 
On a failure, take -1 Command Point.
Deal With a Crisis (0 CP): Explain what you are doing 
to solve a Crisis and roll the relevant skill check. 
The difficulty is usually 10, plus or minus 2 de -
pending on the situation and the effectiveness of 
your action. On a success, the Crisis is resolved. 
You may also use this action to aid another PC in 
resolving a Crisis, or to take one scene’s worth of 
other actions around the ship.
Do Your Duty (0 CP): The ship gains 1 Command Point. 
PCs who head more than one department can act 
only in one of them; the rest automatically take 
this action. If invoked by a PC, they must name 
some plausible act the PC is doing to be useful, and 
can’t do the same act two rounds in a row.
===== PAGE 122 =====
1 1 8• SPaCe Combat
shIP CrIses
Once per round, a ship may choose to accept a Crisis 
instead of taking an enemy hit. They must choose to 
do so immediately after damage is rolled, and only one 
player needs to request the Crisis to get it even if the 
rest of the party doesn’t want it. Once the Crisis is ac-
cepted, the hit is negated and the GM rolls on the table.
The captain may also choose to voluntarily accept 
a Crisis through their Keep It Together or Into the Fire 
department actions. Use of these actions doesn’t count 
against the one-voluntary-Crisis-per-round maximum.
Some Crises are continuing. They will apply a 
penalty to the ship that continues until some PC suc -
cessfully performs a Deal With a Crisis action.
Other Crises are acute. They inflict no immediate 
negative consequence, but if the PCs don’t resolve it 
by the end of the next combat round, an unpleasant 
consequence will ensue. The Crisis is then removed.
The same Crisis rolled more than once will stack 
on the ship, though hits to empty cargo holds or dry 
fuel tanks may not be much of a problem to the ship.
Dealing With a Crisis
Any PC can Deal With a Crisis by taking that gener -
al action and describing what they’re doing to solve 
the problem. They then roll an applicable skill check 
against difficulty 10, possibly modified by up to plus or 
minus two depending on the GM’s judgment of their 
general plan and its likelihood of being helpful. On a 
success, the Crisis is resolved. All Crises are considered 
resolved at the end of an engagement.
Crises
Armor Loss: The hit melted an important patch of ship 
armor, cracked an internal support, or exposed a 
sensitive system. Until resolved, the ship’s Armor 
rating is halved, rounded down.
Cargo Loss: The hit has gored open a cargo bay, threat-
ening to dump the hold or expose delicate con -
tents to ruinous damage. If not resolved by the end 
of the next round, lose d10*10% of the ship’s cargo.
Crew Lost: Brave crew risk their lives to keep damaged 
systems operating. Describe the danger they face. 
If the Crisis is not resolved by the end of the next 
round, 10% of the ship’s maximum crew are inca-
pacitated, not counting any Extended Life Support 
fittings. Half these crewmen are dead or perma -
nently disabled, and the other half return to duty 
in a week. Extended Medbay fittings halve the num-
ber of dead and crippled. If the ship has run out 
of NPC crew when it takes this Crisis, a random 
PC must roll a Physical save; on a success, they 
lose half their hit points, while on a failure, they 
are mortally wounded. If not stabilized by the end 
of the ship’s turn through some PC taking a Deal 
With A Crisis action to heal them, they will die.
Engine Lock: The ship’s engine has been jammed or 
control circuits have gone non-responsive. Until 
resolved, no bridge actions can be taken, though 
the pilot can still perform general actions.
Fuel Bleed: The ship’s fuel tanks have been holed or 
emergency vents have been force-triggered by 
battle damage. If not resolved by the end of the 
next round, the ship will jettison all fuel except the 
minimal amount needed for in-system operation.
Haywire Systems: Critical command links have been 
damaged or disordered by the hit. Until resolved, 
the ship starts each round at -2 Command Points. 
Multiple such Crises can stack this penalty, crip -
pling a ship until the Crises are resolved.
Hull Breach: The hull has been damaged in a way that is 
currently non-critical but is about to tear open an 
important compartment or crumple on vital sys-
tems. If not resolved by the end of the next round, 
the ship will take damage: 1d10 for fighter-class 
hulls, 2d10 for frigates, 3d10 for cruisers, and 4d10 
for capital hulls, all ignoring Armor.
System Damage: One of the ship’s systems has been 
cooked by the hit. The GM randomly picks a 
weapon, fitting, or engine; that system is disabled 
as if hit with a targeted shot, with drives suffering 
a 1 point drive level decrease. Disabled systems hit 
by this Crisis or drives reduced below drive-0 are 
destroyed and cannot be repaired during combat.
Target Decalibration: The gunnery computers are 
hopelessly confused and cannot lock the ship’s 
weaponry on a target until this Crisis is resolved.
VIP Imperiled: Shipboard damage threatens a random 
PC or important NPC. That victim must imme -
diately roll a Physical saving throw; on a success, 
they lose half their hit points, and on a failure they 
are mortally wounded. NPC crew can make a free 
attempt to stabilize the downed VIP using their 
usual NPC skill bonus. If the NPC fails, and no PC 
takes a Deal With a Crisis action to successfully sta-
bilize them by the end of the ship’s turn, they die.
d10 Ship Crisis Type
1 Armor Loss Continuing
2 Cargo Loss Acute
3 Crew Lost Acute
4 Engine Lock Continuing
5 Fuel Bleed Acute
6 Haywire Systems Continuing
7 Hull Breach Acute
8 System Damage Continuing
9 Target Decalibration Continuing
10 VIP Imperiled Acute
===== PAGE 123 =====
The Thunder of the Guns
The free merchant Grendel finds herself engaging the 
Sacred Wrath, a patrol boat of the Luminous Hege -
mony determined to stop the Grendel before it can 
deliver its cargo of military supplies to the rebel out-
post that contracted the ship. Captain Wilhelmina 
Stokes knows she’s substantially outclassed by the 
patrol boat, but she trusts her comrades and is de -
termined to blast her way through.
The combat begins with an initiative roll. The 
Grendel’s pilot rolls 1d8 plus the best of his Intel -
ligence or Dexterity modifiers, getting a 6. The 
Wrath’s pilot rolls a 4, so Grendel goes first.
Grendel starts her turn with 0 Command Points. 
Captain Stokes decides that she’ll act first among the 
crew, and uses the Support Department action to aid 
the gunnery department; one action the gunner 
takes will be 2 Command Points cheaper than usual.
The ship still has no Command Points, how -
ever, so Captain Stokes tells the comms chief to go 
next. Feeling daring, the comms chief decides to go 
Above and Beyond to help the ship, overclocking the 
ship’s computing core. The GM decides this is an 
Int/Program skill check, so the comms chief rolls it 
against difficulty 9. He fails his first roll, but uses his 
Expert class reroll benefit to try again, and gets it the 
second time. The ship gains 3 Command Points for 
the comms chief’s Program-2 skill.
Stokes considers letting the gunner blaze away 
now, but she wants to go for a real torrent of fire to 
open the fight, so she asks the bridge pilot to act next 
to build more Command Points. He chooses to Do 
Your Duty, adding 1 CP and declaring that he’s lining 
the ship up for the shot.
Three Command Points aren’t enough for the 
captain, so despite the gunner’s entreaties, she choos-
es for the engineer to go next. She also plays it safe, 
deciding to Do Your Duty and feed power to the guns.
Lastly, there’s a sixth PC in the crew, a storytell-
er with absolutely no applicable space-faring skills. 
Even though he is no department head, the captain 
nominates him to act next, since every PC gets to act 
each round. Able to take only general actions, the 
storyteller chants a mighty lay of battle to encourage 
his comrades on to glory. The GM lets him roll a 
Cha/Perform skill check to go Above and Beyond, and 
he succeeds, adding 3 more Command Points from 
his Perform-2 skill.
Now, at last, with 8 Command Points, the cap-
tain gives the gunner her signal. The gunner decides 
that it’s absolutely critical to defang the patrol boat 
before it can open up with its plasma beam. He 
chooses to Target Systems with his attack, spending 
1 CP. He knows the free merchant’s sandcaster has 
no chance of piercing the patrol boat’s armor, but 
his multifocal laser can cut through the ship’s plat -
ing. Thus, instead of trying to fire the sandcaster this 
round, he decides to blaze away exclusively with the 
laser, using the Fire One W eapon action. Firing one 
weapon costs 2 Command Points and he has 5 left, 
plus the captain’s Support Department action to give 
him a zero-cost shot.
The gunner is a grizzled Warrior and uses his 
class ability to make the first shot an automatic hit. 
He rolls 1d4 for damage, +1 for his Dexterity modifi-
er, and gets a 3. The multifocal laser’s armor-piercing 
quality of 20 overwhelms the patrol boat’s Armor 
of 5, but since he’s Targeting Systems , his damage 
is halved, rounded up. The patrol boat takes 2 hit 
points of damage… but its plasma beam is now dis-
abled until the boat’s crew can perform repairs.
The gunner’s not satisfied; he wants that gun 
wrecked. He Fires One W eapon again for 2 CP, Tar-
geting Systems once more for 1 CP, rolling a hit roll at 
-4 and using his Shoot skill and Dexterity attribute to 
modify his attack bonus. He hits with a 15 and does 
another 2 damage, destroying the gun.
The GM decides that the patrol boat’s captain 
is willing to go to extremes to prevent this, and lets 
him accept a Crisis instead. The GM rolls 1d10 and 
gets the Hull Breach crisis; if the boat can’t resolve 
it by the end of the next round, it’ll take 2d10 hit 
points of damage that ignores Armor, but for now 
the gunner’s second hit is negated. The gunner has 
2 CP left, so he burns those and his captain-supplied 
free shot on two more attacks, both of which miss. 
The round ends, and if the Grendel had any CP left it 
would lose them now.
Being a properly-trained military crew, the 
Sacred Wrath has 5 Command Points. Her captain 
knows that her absolute priority is getting her gun 
back online, so he spends 3 points to do Emergency 
Repairs from the engineer actions. The GM rolls her 
crew’s default +2 skill bonus and gets a 9, enough to 
fix the plasma beam and remove its disabled status.
That leaves the NPC ship with 2 Command 
Points left, which is just enough to open fire. The 
gunner blasts away with the plasma beam, using his 
hit bonus of +4 to get a 17, enough to hit the Grendel. 
The plasma beam does 12 points of damage to the 
free merchant, its AP 10 defeating the target’s Armor.
Captain Stokes can’t handle a hit like this and 
immediately accepts a Crisis. The GM rolls an Armor 
Loss result, halving the Grendel’s already-sad Armor.
The next round then begins. The PCs have the 
edge, as the Wrath is going to need to Deal With a Cri-
sis or take a heavy hit at round’s end. If the Grendel’s 
gunner can’t shut down that plasma beam, however, 
the free merchant runs the risk of eating more hits 
than it can survive… or trying to evade those hits and 
rolling a Crisis her crew can’t handle.
SPaCe Combat •1 1 9 
===== PAGE 124 =====

===== PAGE 125 =====
THE HISTORY OF SPACE
The default setting of Stars Without Number is a far 
future age in which the sprawling, glorious domain 
of human space has been reduced to a scattering of 
squabbling powers and long-lost worlds. The ancient 
domain of humanity has shrunken with the collapse 
of the psi-powered Jump Gates that once stitched the 
remote regions of the frontier into the teeming worlds 
of the human core.
Now, almost six hundred years after the catastro -
phe that ended the Golden Age of Man, new hope rises 
from the wreckage of a fallen empire.
In the Beginning
Humanity’s interstellar history began in a musty insta-
fab laboratory on a remote coast in northern Greenland 
in the year 2108. A small army of jury-rigged microfab 
plants and hotwired autofacs had been churning for 
years, painstakingly realizing the plans of their creator. 
Dr. Tiberius Crohn was an insular lunatic of the first 
water, a laughingstock among physicists and a regular 
font of absurd claims. Were it not for his admitted tal-
ent at wrangling autofacs he would likely have vanished 
into the twenty-second century’s faceless proletarian 
mass without so much as a ripple.
His talents had gotten him the parts and resources 
to establish his laboratory in the radioactive wilds of 
Greenland, not far from the hot zone left by a missile 
from the Russo-European War. The glow masked the 
peculiar emissions from his test units, but in 2108 his 
work finally reached fruition. Crohn had invented the 
spike drive, the faster-than-light engine that would lift 
humanity to the stars.
Even now, a thousand years later, researchers 
still wonder how Crohn managed to devise the math -
ematics and theories that supported the spike drive’s 
creation. Widespread claims of “alien influence” were 
debunked by later Mandate historians, but rumors of 
these “Mentors” are still stock space legends.
Some of the axioms involved defied all percepti -
ble reality, and the theories made certain assumptions 
about the fabric of the universe that spun off at least a 
dozen new religions within the first two hundred years 
of the discovery. The spike drive was a window on a 
universe far stranger and vaster than experimenters 
had thought possible.
Through a delicate gravitic twisting of the uni -
versal substrate beneath a ship, the spike drive drove 
it “upward” through a spectrum of dimensional fre -
quencies. The ship vanished from mundane, “luminal” 
space and was thrust into the metadimensions. These 
inchoate realms of vast energy currents and formless 
masses were extremely hostile to unprepared ships, 
but their gravitic currents propelled a ship at speeds 
impossible in the mundane universe. Suitably massive 
objects such as stars cast a “shadow” into these meta -
dimensions, forming both navigational beacons and 
anchor-points that enabled transit up and down the 
dimensional spectrum. So long as a spike drive had a 
star to launch from and a star to bring it down, it could 
ride the metadimensional currents in a headlong rush 
of superluminal speed.
The initial transit along a course was always the 
most dangerous. The metadimensional currents were 
unmapped on those routes, and a navigator had to 
make regular course corrections in hope of finding a 
current that would bring them to their course before 
the spike drive’s protective bubble broke down in the 
metadimensional environment.
Once the initial journey had been made, course 
rutters could be shared with other ships. So long as 
ships regularly made the transit, any shifts in the cur -
rents could be recorded. If a route lay fallow for too 
long, however, the slow creep of currents would render 
the rutters worse than useless, and a fresh course would 
need to be plotted by some brave crew.
Crohn’s discovery was announced by the sudden 
launch of his retrofitted spacecraft-laboratory from the 
Greenland hot zone. A number of orbital weapons plat-
forms attempted to bring it down, but the spike drive 
provided such a wildly anomalous maneuver profile 
that the tracking algorithms were hopelessly confused. 
Earthside watch stations followed him out to the edge 
of the solar system, dutifully recording his ship’s impos-
sible velocity. At the very rim of the system the sensors 
picked up a strange gravitic surge, and he was gone.
He returned thirteen days later, broadcasting a ra-
dio transmission that not only included data on Alpha 
Centauri that could only have been acquired through 
on-site surveying, but also included the necessary data 
for the reconstruction of the spike drive. Between the 
observations of the tracking stations and the content 
of the signal, there was no doubt of it; mad old Crohn 
had actually done it.
Even today, no one is entirely certain how he man-
aged it. A prototype spike drive would have required 
six days of metadimensional travel to reach Alpha 
Centauri and drill down into mundane space. Crohn 
claimed to be alone aboard the ship, but such would 
have required him to remain awake and navigating the 
uncharted drill course for six straight days, all without 
any hint of prior experience. The creed that later be-
came known as the Book of the Sky refers to it as “the 
Night Journey of the Prophet Tiberius” and considers 
it the founding event of the faith.
Tiberius himself promptly drilled back out into 
metaspace once his transmission had been sent. He was 
never seen again. To this day, thirteen known religious 
sects are convinced that he was translated directly into 
the presence of God as a fitting reward to the opener 
of the celestial ways.
===== PAGE 126 =====
1 22• the hiStory of SPaCe
The First Wave of Colonization
Exclusivity was impossible with this new discovery. 
Overnight, every industrialized nation on Earth began 
a frantic rush to build spike drive-equipped starships, 
each nation fearing to be left behind in claiming the 
stars above. Paradoxically, earthside tensions faded rap-
idly as the disposition of this spit of land or that patch 
of oil seemed to be trivial compared to the wealth that 
awaited in the sky.
Initial exploration revealed that the spike drives 
had a maximum range before the corrosive effect of the 
metadimensional environment fatally degraded their 
protective bubbles of mundane space. It was necessary 
to hop from star to star, reaching more distant stellar 
bodies by progressive advance. In the course of these 
explorations numerous exotic planetary bodies were 
discovered. The first one habitable by human beings 
was a barren mudball with an oxygen-rich atmosphere 
discovered in 2113. Dubbed Renaissance by its Greater 
European discoverers, it drove the other Terran na -
tions outward in an even greater frenzy of exploratory 
acquisitiveness.
Pan-Indian scouts discovered the first life-bearing 
world in 2150. The primordial soup that covered the 
water world of Pranashakti served as a research sub -
ject for a generation of xenobiologists. The excitement 
was only heightened when an American survey craft 
discovered the ancient alien ruins on the mist-shroud-
ed moon called Typhon. Their creators had vanished 
more than 40,000 years ago, but the scanty remains 
showed evidence of a technologically sophisticated cul-
ture possessing a humanoid anatomy not wholly unlike 
that of humankind.
This First Wave of colonization sent humanity in a 
steadily expanding sphere from the green fields of Ter-
ra. By 2200, most habitable worlds within a year’s spike 
drive travel had at least a handful of human inhabitants. 
Numerous political and religious splinter groups took 
to the heavens once asteroid mining brought the price 
of a spike drive-equipped starship within the reach of a 
large corporation. Humanity was growing beyond the 
reach of its leaders.
Retrenchment and the Mandate
The governments of Terra grew increasingly con -
cerned with their far-flung colonists. Even the fastest 
spike drive courier couldn’t reach the Rim worlds in 
less than four months, and projecting military force 
at such a distance was beyond the power of all but the 
strongest nations. Rather than let their colonists slip 
entirely out of their control, the greater powers on 
Terra agreed to form the Terran Mandate, an organi-
zation dedicated to policing human space and exerting 
the authority of Terran governments over the far-flung 
colony worlds.
Furthermore, expansion beyond the current Rim 
worlds was forbidden. Splinter groups, cults, and mi -
crocultures were required to live within the pale and 
were forbidden to colonize worlds of their own for 
reasons of “social harmony” and “interstellar security”. 
More than a few of these groups defied the new Man-
date and sought worlds beyond their reach in the far 
dark. Deprived of the usual sources of support, most 
were never heard from again.
Even with these new limits, the Terran Mandate 
was hard-pressed to contain the colonial worlds. There 
was little in the way of actual fighting between the col-
onies, as few had the ships or manpower to spare, but 
here and there the more zealous splinter groups or 
dedicated ideologues could not bear to live in peace 
with their neighbors. The Mandate kept a loose sort 
of discipline over the Rim worlds but by the year 2260 
direct control was tenuous at best.
MES and the Psionic Authority
It was during the peak of the First Wave, in 2240, that 
the first instances of a frightening new syndrome ap-
peared in the children of starship crew members. Per-
haps one in ten thousand of these children would be-
gin to exhibit strange and inexplicable powers. Some 
time around puberty, abilities manifested that ranged 
from an intuitive vision of the immediate future, to 
inexplicable mind-reading, to powers of superluminal 
teleportation. Children who exercised these abilities 
invariably suffered progressive and permanent neural 
damage leading either to death or permanent insanity. 
A dozen uses, two dozen… sooner or later the damage 
overwhelmed the victim. Only by completely avoiding 
use of these powers could a child’s mind be saved.
Dubbed “Metadimensional Extroversion Syn -
drome”, or “MES” by researchers, these subjects were 
gathered for extensive testing and examination. Par -
ents were told that the children would be taught ways 
of controlling and suppressing their abilities, but most 
modern researchers believe that some among the 
children were used as guinea pigs in terrible experi -
ments meant to quantify this new power. Whatever 
the means, the investigators soon learned that “Messes” 
were actually serving as living channels for waves of 
metadimensional energy.
The power was shaped and focused by the wield-
er’s neural pathways. Mere meat was never meant to 
endure the kind of energies that boiled through a Mess, 
and neural pathways were left scorched or burnt out 
entirely by use of the powers. Every test was destruc -
tive. The only question was whether repeated use of the 
powers would kill the Mess’ body first or take their san-
ity. Researchers also discovered that once the energies 
had finally burnt out a victim’s mind, the charred brain 
pathways were effectively immune to further damage. 
An insane Mess, or “feral” could use their powers with 
impunity, and usually did.
It wasn’t until 2275 that these shadowy researches 
finally bore fruit. The damage to a Mess’s mind could 
not be avoided, but by individualized programs of 
meditation, focus, and mental training, the damage 
===== PAGE 127 =====
the hiStory of SPaCe •1 23 
could be routed through less critical areas of the brain. 
A properly-trained “psychic”, as they were now called, 
could use their powers extensively before the charge 
threatened to overflow their existing channels and they 
were required to rest and recuperate.
Formulating these programs of study required a 
trained psychic mentor to shape the basic curriculum 
into the correct sequence of meditations for a given 
pupil. Despite the best efforts of researchers, it proved 
impossible to impart this education through record -
ed means of instruction. A living, psychically-active 
metapsion tutor properly educated in the training pro-
tocols was mandatory in teaching new psychics.
In an attempt to control the provision of psychic 
mentors, the Terran Mandate inaugurated the Psionic 
Authority. The PA grew to be a quiet but pervasive 
organization throughout human space, taking young 
MES sufferers into its care for training. The rarity of 
MES left psychics largely as figures of mystery and no 
little fear to less gifted humans. Psychics could often 
make vast sums of money with their powers, but many 
worlds established sharp restrictions on psychic activi-
ties… and then often employed government-sponsored 
psychics who could ignore the strictures.
First Contacts
As these changes rippled through human culture, the 
species found itself no longer alone in the cosmos. The 
steady expansion of human space discovered more than 
empty ruins on several habitable worlds. The Young 
Races such as the Kont and Ualub were found inhab-
iting their ancestral worlds, diligently building their 
way towards Bronze Age technologies. Some species 
seemed to be the decaying remnants of a former empire, 
such as the handful of used-up worlds that housed the 
weary race of Mettau and their cities of dancing glass. 
These Elder Races had all had their time in the sun, tens 
or hundreds of thousands of years ago, only to fall prey 
to internecine strife, vainglorious experimentation, or 
sheer cultural ennui.
Some of these alien races were strong and vigorous 
still, though usually fresh from their own technological 
youth. A few short, sharp border wars usually settled 
matters in humanity’s favor, and even those wars that 
were not so successfully prosecuted lost mankind only a 
few worlds within easy reach of their rivals. More often, 
these races formed uneasy trade pacts with humanity, 
exchanging examples of strange alien technology and 
art for the science of human worlds.
The majority of sentient alien species that humani-
ty discovered shared roughly similar humanoid dimen-
sions. Called “the Like” by xenobiologists, controversy 
still bubbles over the seeming prevalence of humanoid 
form among alien races. Some scientists suggest that 
the humanoid shape is simply the one most suitable to 
the expression of sentience. Others find this explana -
tion too simplistic, and believe that humanoid shapes 
are simply most suitable to the kind of human-habit -
able biomes that draw the most interest from human 
explorers. Further exploration might reveal legions 
of supercondensed life forms in the core of gas giant 
worlds, or flocks of hydrogen-based webs floating in 
the darkness between stars.
Some species owe nothing to human form. These 
Others are alien in a way that no oxygen-breather could 
possibly be. Some are composed of silicon or alien earth 
compounds, such as the “lithomorphs” and their plan-
etoid-ships. Others are congeries of spherical atmo -
sphere-bubbles, or sentient interference-patterns set 
up in the oceans of an ammonia-covered liquid world. 
The Others are almost invariably too different in mind 
and needs for humans to communicate with them. 
Their acts of violence are inexplicable and seemingly 
random, and their purposes defy human comprehen -
sion. Psychics who attempt to contact the mind of an 
Other risk their sanity under waves of awareness ut -
terly unlike the thoughts of a fleshly brain.
Pretech, Psitech, and the Gates
Psionic Authority researchers had not halted their 
study of MES energies after their initial training break-
throughs. Official histories credit the discoveries to the 
courage of a few psychics willing to conduct destructive, 
dangerous experiments on their own minds. Legends 
speak more of criminal psychics and bewildered young 
Messes “encouraged” to cooperate in experiments that 
eventually claimed their sanity or their lives.
Whatever the source of the data, the Psionic Au-
thority was able to formulate new techniques of psychic 
power. These abilities were usually very subtle and es-
oteric, microscopic adjustments of ambient universal 
constants that allowed for the manufacture of materi-
als and products that were simply impossible to create 
with technology bound to the mundane world’s laws. 
Atoms and molecules danced to the will of these fabri-
cator psychics, and new wonders were born from the 
factories of humanity.
The introduction of psychic fabrication marked 
the development of “pretech”, the high science and ar-
tifice of the Golden Age of Man. Pretech artifacts were 
marvelous works, most of them performing some mir-
acle of energy manipulation or material science. Pre -
tech spike drives doubled the maximum reach of a drill 
course, and pretech drugs and biotech gave humankind 
several centuries of hale good health before age might 
claim them.
The greatest accomplishment of pretech, however, 
was in the development of “psitech”, a complex melding 
of psychofabricated pretech components and psionical-
ly-active materials. Psitech devices could channel and 
amplify a psychic’s abilities to a remarkable degree. Psi-
tech was never common, given the rarity of psychics 
themselves, but it found regular employment in pre -
tech manufactories.
The greatest accomplishment of psitech, in turn, 
was the development of the Jump Gates. These mas -
===== PAGE 128 =====
1 24• the hiStory of SPaCe
sive rings of psitech resonators floated at the far rim 
of a solar system, wide enough to receive the slowboat 
freighters that lumbered out from planetary orbits. 
With the help of a choir of master psychic teleporters, 
these ships would be hurled for scores of light years 
across the galaxy, emerging from a Jump Gate held 
in waiting at their destination point. The weeks or 
months of spike drive travel that would otherwise be 
required were compressed into a few days.
The Jump Gates quickly replaced spike drive trav-
el throughout the core regions of human space. The 
only check on their expansion was finding the nec -
essary number of master teleporters to power them, 
and the great expense of shipping components out to 
more distant worlds unable to fabricate them on-site. 
By 2450, almost all core and Rim worlds were served by 
Jump Gates. The ease and cheapness of mass interstellar 
transport caused some worlds to specialize as agricul -
tural planets and other worlds to rely on interstellar 
food imports.
By 2600, spike drives were antiquated technology, 
found almost exclusively along the frontier of human 
space where Jump Gates were too expensive and econ-
omies too primitive to justify their use.
The Second Wave
By then, the Second Wave of human colonization had 
reached its peak. The development of the Jump Gates 
had allowed the Terran Mandate to project its mili -
tary strength far more easily, and the prohibitions on 
expansion had been loosened. By 2600, the frontier of 
human space extended almost ten years of spike drive 
travel away from Terra. Even after taking Jump Gates 
as far as possible, a fast pretech courier ship required a 
year to reach the farthest colonial worlds.
The Jump Gates allowed for massive numbers of 
colonists to flee the stultifying bonds of stratified Ter-
ran society. Over four billion people left Terra over the 
course of the Second Wave, most of them sent gladly 
by governments that were more than willing to dispose 
of their more troublesome subjects. It wasn’t until late 
in the Second Wave that the Terran Mandate began 
to realize that it simply didn’t have the manpower 
necessary to police the colonial worlds. Even with the 
overwhelming technological advantage of Terran fleets, 
there were simply too many colonies and too many 
colonists to maintain direct control.
The colonies realized this as well, starting around 
2450. There was rarely an explicit rebellion against 
the Mandate; most often it was a disobedience of slow 
decay, with tax shipments becoming intermittent and 
then absent, and Mandate orders obeyed first slowly 
and then not at all. The Mandate fleet struck a few of 
the most valuable recalcitrants, but it was a rear-guard 
action. The Terran Mandate had grown itself beyond 
its ability to maintain control.
In the wild void of the frontier, spike drive arma -
das and petty stellar kingdoms formed to settle ancient 
arguments between ideologies, religions, and simple 
differences of ambition. Maltech research began to 
take root on more isolated worlds, with forbidden 
research into unbraked AIs, replicant nanotech, and 
weapons of planetary destruction. Some worlds began 
to experiment with human genomic modification be-
yond anything that convention had permitted. These 
eugenics cultists sought the wholesale improvement 
of the human genetic legacy despite the terrible costs 
in maladaptive mutation and instability. Forces of the 
Terran Mandate’s Perimeter agency tried to contain 
these researches, but often were simply too few and 
too poorly supported to do more than report on events.
The Golden Age of Man was already strained by 
the pressures of these squabbling worlds and a Mandate 
grown senile. Its deathblow was yet to come.
The Scream and the Silence
In 2665 a massive wave of metadimensional ener -
gy washed over human space. Spike drive craft in 
metaspace were annihilated instantly, and in the blink 
of an eye, every psychic in human space immediate -
ly suffered the consequences of catastrophic psychic 
burnout. The majority died instantly, with the handful 
that remained raving in the grip of incurable madness.
Later reconstruction placed the origin of this 
“Scream” somewhere in the Veil Nebula, but no re -
cords exist of any successful investigation. Too much 
collapsed too quickly for any sort of exploratory expe-
dition to be sent. Humanity was suddenly stripped of 
every psychic resource. Without living mentors, new 
generations of psychics could not be trained without 
recreating the entire laborious research corpus of the 
now-erased Psionic Authority. It would take genera -
tions to mold functional mentors out of the untrained 
mass of native psychics.
There was no time to recreate the necessary train-
ing. The Jump Gates were dead, and the core worlds of 
human space collapsed with them. Countless colonies 
that relied on the bulk produce of agricultural worlds 
were left starving within months, their shipyards over-
run by the desperate and ruined in the convulsive fight-
ing over the few remaining spike drive ships. There 
was no possible way to feed a world of millions with 
the limited freight capacity of spike drive ships; only 
the Jump Gates and their massive slowboat freighters 
could move such masses of cargo, and the slowboats 
were too big to be retrofitted with spike drives… even 
if they could cross the stars quickly enough to make a 
difference, which they could not.
Echoes of the disaster rippled outward. The fron-
tier regions were still too poor and primitive to afford 
Jump Gates, so the worlds that remained on the edge 
of human space were forced to supply their own pop-
ulation with food and other necessities. Some of these 
worlds relied on small shipments of vital supplies from 
the core worlds. These luckless planets died when their 
motherworlds perished. Others were more self-reliant, 
===== PAGE 129 =====
the hiStory of SPaCe •1 25 
but few of these had the necessary resources to build 
spike drive ships of their own. Those few worlds that 
were able to construct the ships struggled as their psi -
tech became useless and their shipments of vital core 
world components stopped.
Human space had collapsed into a welter of isolat-
ed worlds. Interstellar travel fell to the handful of spike 
drive ships that could be kept running on scavenged 
components and half-derelict spaceyards. The Silence 
had begun.
The Silence Ends
For almost six hundred years, humanity has been slow-
ly recovering from the consequences of the Scream. 
Many frontier worlds have collapsed into barbarism 
and balkanized warfare. These “lost worlds” have suffi-
cient resources for agriculture and life, but lack the fos-
sil fuels or radioactives necessary to bootstrap modern 
technology. Some have even forgotten their origins or 
have had them obscured in the haze of legend and myth.
Other worlds have been more fortunate. These 
planets have been lucky enough to have the resources 
necessary to sustain a rough and ready level of tech -
nology. Their fusion plants are bulkier than the pre -
tech that existed before the Scream, their spike drive 
engines are slower and more unstable, and the medical 
technology is working well if it can give the popula -
tion even a hundred years of good health before death 
claims them. Still, these worlds have managed to de -
vise methods for doing without the esoteric disciplines 
of the psychic fabricators and are slowly ramping up 
their production of spike drive ships as their techniques 
improve. This “postech” may be inferior, but after the 
Silence it can be replicated in a way that pretech cannot.
A few worlds have even managed to rediscover 
the basic techniques of psychic mentorship. The fab -
ulously subtle and sophisticated disciplines necessary 
for recreating the old pretech manufactories are still 
long-lost, but these new academies are at least able to 
teach their students how to channel their powers in rel-
atively safe and useful ways. Some worlds guard these 
secrets jealously, but others make substantial profit out 
of training foreign psychics sent by neighboring worlds. 
A few academies operate without any governmental 
supervision at all, willingly teaching their secrets to 
anyone with the money or a compatible ideology.
Stellar domains have begun to form around the 
most powerful worlds. Projecting more than a few tens 
of thousands of troops to a neighboring world is far 
beyond the abilities of most planets, so these domains 
tend to be loose confederacies of like-minded worlds, or 
else sparsely-populated colonies held under the ruthless 
control of a vastly larger and more powerful neighbor. 
Most of these domains are held together by a glue of 
ideology and trade benefits, and border skirmishes are 
becoming more common between rival space empires.
The alien neighbors of humanity have not been 
idle during the Silence. The Scream appears to have 
affected psychically-active races as badly as the humans 
were wounded, but those species that were not so vul-
nerable have expanded into human space at several 
points on the frontier. Some have even gone so far as 
to seize human worlds for their own. In a few unfortu-
nate regions of human space, entire sectors have been 
conquered by alien powers.
Now, in the year 3200, the fragile web of inter -
stellar commerce and exploration has been reformed. 
Countless worlds remain locked in the darkness of 
the Silence, awaiting the bold merchants or reckless 
explorers willing to return them to the embrace of in-
terstellar humanity. And if these brave souls should be 
rewarded with the ancient wealth in salvage and data 
so long trapped on these worlds, who is to say that they 
do not deserve it?
===== PAGE 130 =====
1 26• the hiStory of SPaCe
a TImelIne of The fuTure
2108: The spike drive is discovered by crank scientist Dr. 
Tiberius Crohn. Humanity moves almost over -
night from a handful of science stations on the 
solar system’s inner worlds to all-out interstellar 
exploration. Numerous Terran governments seek 
the resources of new worlds.
2110: Several scout craft are lost while learning the lim-
its of the spike drive. The dangers of excessive 
frequency climbing are recorded by survivors.
2113: The first habitable extrasolar world is discovered 
by the scout ship Magellan. The ship’s patrons 
promptly claim the world for Greater Europe and 
name it Renaissance.
2120: Pranashakti, the first life-bearing alien world, is 
discovered by a Pan-Indian scout ship. The organ-
isms consist solely of plant analogues and some 
primitive marine life, but a generation of xenobi-
ologists finds work in analyzing it all.
2130: The development of asteroid mining technology 
provides vast amounts of raw materials to Earth’s 
orbital shipyards and factories. Ship prices plunge, 
and numerous smaller organizations and states be-
come capable of stellar exploration.
2150: The ruins of an advanced alien species are discov-
ered on Typhon, an otherwise unremarkable gas 
giant moon. Archaeologists date the ruins to ap-
proximately 40,000 BCE. Dubbed “the Watchers” 
for the eye-like circular motifs on the ruins, few 
details are learned about the species.
2200: The First Wave of human expansion reaches its 
peak. Most habitable planets within a year’s travel 
time from Earth have been successfully colonized, 
many by small religious or ideological groups. 
Terran nations begin to forbid further explora -
tion for fear of being unable to maintain control 
over their offworld colonies over such distances. 
The Terran Mandate is organized by Earth’s su -
perpowers in order to ensure that Terran control 
of the colonies continues.
2240: “Metadimensional Extroversion Syn drome” be-
gins to manifest in certain fifth-generation spacers. 
Occurring most often around puberty, the abilities 
exhibited by MES victims seem flatly impossible 
by normal scientific measure: telepathy, teleporta-
tion, precognitive flashes, and other abilities that 
defy understanding. The syndrome is inevitably 
fatal unless the victim avoids all use of their un-
canny abilities.
2260: Some colony worlds begin to grow restive, and 
there are incidents of skirmishing and piracy on 
the frontier. Few disputes are over resources, but 
ideological and religious conflicts become more 
common. The Terran Mandate struggles to deal 
with the twelve-month message delay between 
Earth and the farthest colony worlds.
2275: Researchers on several deep-space colonies begin 
to develop methods for controlling the advance 
of MES, allowing its victims to use their abili -
ties without inflicting permanent brain damage 
on themselves. The lives lost in this research are 
never fully numbered, but Terran governments 
rapidly move to control the research and training 
under the aegis of the “Psionic Authority”.
2280: Properly-trained MES carriers, known common-
ly as “psychics”,or more casually, as “Messes”, be-
gin to use their abilities to assist governments and 
private enterprise. Numerous fields begin to ben-
efit from the assistance of MES subjects, ranging 
from telepathic mental health providers to pre -
cognitive industrial managers. The Psionic Au -
thority begins to experiment with more focused, 
industrially-useful psionic disciplines. Again, the 
cost in lives is undisclosed.
2315: The Psionic Authority perfects the first jump gate. 
A massive ring of psitech placed at the periphery 
of the solar system, the gate employs a choir of 
over fifty master teleporters to instantly translate 
ships to a matching gate at Renaissance. Gate dis-
persal is slowed by a lack of master teleporters, but 
eventually the transit time between Earth and the 
frontier is reduced to two days. The Earth nations 
lift the ban on further exploration now that their 
effective control is enhanced.
2330: The Second Wave of human colonization begins. 
Spike drive ships become all but unknown within 
the core worlds as the jump gates allow cheaper 
system ships to travel between the older colonies.
2350: Psitech-enhanced manufactory abilities and pre-
cognitive surveyors vastly increase the rate of via-
ble colonization. Almost two billion humans leave 
Earth for the wealth and freedom of the colony 
worlds. The Terran Mandate begins to realize that 
they now lack the manpower necessary to main-
tain control over so many colonies, even with the 
reduced transit time.
2400: Obedience to Terran governments is now a polite 
fiction on the frontier, in those cases when it is 
acknowledged at all. The first stellar unions begin 
to form. Some neighboring worlds resort to war, 
but most colonists see no need for fighting with 
so many unexploited resources.
2425: The Terran Mandate has become deeply corrupt 
and hopelessly decadent. Its Directors concern 
themselves exclusively with their own interests, 
rivalries, and ideological obsessions. Only the AI 
Maestros of Earth act as a check on their actions, 
as the Directors are unable to effectively control 
the Mandate without the help of their AI adjuncts. 
These AIs struggle to maintain a basic level of pro-
bity among their creators.
===== PAGE 131 =====
the hiStory of SPaCe •1 27 
2450: The Second Wave is at its peak; it is the Gold -
en Age of Man. The Terran Mandate has largely 
given up on exerting control over the frontier col-
onies, and now concentrates simply on neutraliz-
ing threats to the core worlds. Every description 
of human civilization and ideology can be found 
somewhere in human space, and cultures experi-
ment with new forms of social organization. Psi -
tech supplements normal technology to produce 
enormous abundance for even the poorest worlds 
with access to core technology.
2460: Human gengineering becomes common on some 
worlds as societies attempt to improve their mem-
bers. Advances in longevity and health spread 
widely, but attempts to significantly improve hu -
man capabilities invariably bring serious draw -
backs from system strain and unanticipated side 
effects. Still, some of the more zealous cultures are 
willing to accept these consequences in pursuit of 
the “perfect human”.
2500: Jump Gates begin to reach the frontier. Major 
systems are the first to receive them, while most 
of the minor worlds are still reliant on spike drive 
ships. The furthest reaches of the frontier now 
extend ten years of spike drive travel from Earth. 
Population growth levels off and begins to decline 
with the increasing wealth of the colonies and 
their progressive self-absorption.
2550: Certain remote sectors of space have begun to 
embrace both gengineering and advanced AI 
integration to recreate humanity in ways more 
suitable to local ambitions. Some of these sectors 
continue to interact with their baseline human 
neighbors, while other transhumans are danger -
ously aggressive in their proselytization.
2600: Spike drive ships are now somewhat antiquated, 
serving a vastly reduced exploratory effort and as 
militia ships for the defense of local systems. Al-
most all core systems of importance are now linked 
with jump gates. Psitech has permeated even very 
basic technology on these worlds. Large-scale war 
between worlds is almost unknown.
2665: The Scream erupts from somewhere within the 
Veil Nebula. Reconstructions of the event suggest 
that it was some form of faster-than-light psychic 
emanation, the wave propagating from one end of 
human space to the other within seventeen min-
utes. The Scream inevitably rendered a psychic 
either dead or hopelessly insane. The Jump Gate 
network collapses. A period of stellar isolation and 
chaos begins, now commonly called “the Silence”.
2665: On Earth, the maddened arch-psions known as 
the Crazed annihilate the planet’s infrastructure, 
destroy many AI Maestros, and pervert the High-
shine nanite recovery system. The solar system’s 
defense grid is activated and made universally 
hostile to all starships. Earth vanishes from all 
surviving records, its present condition unknown.
2700: Countless core worlds die as they are cut off from 
vital food and technical supplies. Psitech manu -
factories are crippled, and only a relative handful 
of spike drive ships can be fabricated before the 
industrial base erodes. These ships band together 
for security while searching for resupply and be-
come the progenitors of today’s Scavenger Fleets.
2705: Frontier worlds fare better than core planets. 
More spike drive ships are available, and those 
worlds that have yet to receive Jump Gates were 
still devoting effort to autonomous agriculture 
and industry. Even so, the sudden loss of every 
human psychic leaves their psitech equipment and 
industries largely useless. Many frontier worlds 
devolve to survival-level subsistence.
2710: The last easily-salvaged remnants of Mandate pre-
tech begin to wear out or become used up. The 
most useful or effective tech was often explicitly 
designed to be irreplaceable by frontier worlds in 
order to maintain the Mandate core’s monopoly 
on the technology. With the core worlds dead or 
consumed by struggle, this technology can now 
be found only in lost caches and Mandate ruins. 
Some worlds go to desperate extremes to maintain 
vital pretech infrastructure, utilizing dangerous 
methods or unstable repurposed tech.
2900: Attempts are made to recover the techniques of 
psychic training. The complete absence of any ex-
perienced psychic trainers hampers this effort, and 
the cost in psychic lives to recreate this training is 
enormous. A few worlds are successful in devel -
oping crude training programs, but most societies 
abandon the effort in the face of more immediate 
planetary needs.
3050: The Silence starts to lift. Those worlds that did 
not experience a terminal collapse after the Scream 
finally begin to perfect techniques of large-scale 
manufacturing that do not rely on psitech. Even 
the most sophisticated training programs can no 
longer replicate the narrow and esoteric talents of 
pre-Silence psychic fabricators.
3100: Spike drive ships begin the remapping of drill 
courses between stars. With almost five centuries 
of neglect, the pre-Silence rutters have become 
useless. The steady shifting of dimensional layers 
has rendered old course soundings dangerously 
inaccurate. All of the drill courses must be redis-
covered through trial and potentially fatal error. 
Few Scavenger Fleets cooperate in sharing their 
course data due to fears of competition.
3150: Stellar unions start to form around the strongest 
worlds. Exploration continues, often in the hands 
of small traders and scout crews who are willing 
to risk all for the chance to open a route to an un-
plundered tomb world. Warfare erupts between 
unions contesting control over lost worlds and 
space installations.
3200: The present day.
===== PAGE 132 =====

===== PAGE 133 =====
SECTOR CREATION
Every self-respecting sci-fi game needs to be able to 
provide a stock of interesting alien worlds. Even if a 
campaign should happen to take place largely on a sin-
gle world, the backdrop of foreign spheres adds context 
and additional adventure hooks to the game.
Most campaigns are going to involve substantial 
world-hopping, however, and the GM needs to be 
ready to deal with this. This chapter will give you the 
tools you need to fashion a sector of the void that will 
be worth the reckless daring of a band of heroic PCs.
The Nature of Sectors
In the former days of the Mandate, human space was 
generally divided into administrative sectors, each one 
the particular responsibility of some fragment of the 
ancient Terran bureaucracy. By the end of the Second 
Wave, these responsibilities were almost entirely ficti-
tious, as the Mandate Fleet lacked the manpower nec-
essary to exert Old Earth’s will on its scattered progeny. 
Even so, the centuries-old grind of bureaucratic pro -
cedure still dutifully labeled each fragment of distant 
space with its own identity.
Sectors were established on the basis of metadi -
mensional proximity rather than simple spatial pro -
pinquity. Individual stars in a sector might be spread 
out over dozens of light years, but the metadimensional 
currents between them were strong enough to allow 
quick travel among them, when a physically-neighbor-
ing star might require impossibly lengthy drills through 
metadimensional space to reach it.
Settlers in these far sectors often adopted Mandate 
sector nomenclature simply out of convenience. The 
sectors that Fleet scout ships and far trader adventurers 
mapped out were composed of stars “close” enough to 
allow for trade with their ramshackle spike drives and 
colonial cargo haulers, and their density allowed for 
trade and assistance between nearby friendly worlds. 
Those with a more isolationist bent sought out sectors 
with far-scattered stars that couldn’t be bridged by the 
less sophisticated drives that most colonists used.
Most sectors had limited contact with other re -
gions of space. While “bordering” stars could some -
times allow drills into a neighboring sector, large 
patches of unfriendly metadimensional space often 
strictly limited the available paths into or out of a sector. 
Some sectors were entirely inaccessible by anything but 
top-grade Mandate spike drives capable of leaping the 
broad gaps around them, and some entire regions were 
isolated by a few narrow bridgepoints into the cluster.
As a consequence, modern human space varies 
wildly in every respect. Some regions have sophisticat-
ed interstellar trade and wide-reaching empires, while 
others are struggling to rise from primitive barbarism. 
A lost bridgepoint can separate whole empires, leaving 
both entirely ignorant of each other… for the moment.
Sectors In Your Game
From a campaign perspective, sectors limit the scope 
of material you need to take into account in your game. 
While it’s perfectly possible to run a game with multi-
ple interconnected sectors, the sheer bulk of worlds can 
make that a painful prospect for most GMs. A single 
sector of 21-30 worlds is more than enough for most 
parties to explore.
Sectors and interstellar regions also provide you 
with a convenient explanation for running dramati -
cally different campaigns. Players who want to run a 
space-operatic game set in a region of easy spaceflight 
and consistent high-tech marvels can do so, while a 
group that wants a harder sci-fi experience in a sector 
without psionic powers or exotic energy weapons can 
have their play as well. The vast sweep of human space 
has room for your preferred tropes without having to 
fight the setting. No matter what you want to play, 
there’s some chunk of human space that has it.
A sector provides the basic background for the ad-
ventures the PCs encounter, as every world needs to 
have some kind of adventure-worthy content if it’s to 
justify its drain on a GM’s creativity and focus. Creat -
ing worlds purely for pleasure or aesthetic satisfaction 
is entirely valid, but as a working GM, you also need 
material you can play. This chapter will show you how 
to maximize the return on your effort, and get the most 
playable content out of the least amount of work.
This is a necessity in any system, but it is especial-
ly important if you’re going to be running a sandbox 
game. A GM who tries to flesh out every nook and 
cranny of the dozens of worlds they create will be rap-
idly exhausted by the effort, and might still lack the 
content they need to actually run a game during the 
next session of play. A GM needs to have a plan and 
an appropriate set of tools if they are to deal with the 
challenge in a comfortable, straightforward way.
When building a sector, you can generally assume 
that it’s isolated from any neighboring regions. There 
might be a few connections along the “borders” of the 
sector, still-remembered spike drive paths into the next 
collection of worlds, but you’ve got enough to build if 
you just focus on a single sector at a time.
You are advised to carefully read the following 
pages and take heed of the advice on how much con-
tent you should create for each world. A GM would 
not be a GM if they did not take pleasure in creating 
wondrous new worlds to explore, but the most enthu-
siastic demiurge still has a limited amount of creative 
energy, time, and focus to spend on a campaign. If you 
follow the steps in the following pages, you’ll be able to 
ensure a playable amount of gaming content for your 
next session before you start spending your effort on 
more decorative elements of your creation.
===== PAGE 134 =====
130• SeCtor Creation
CreaTIng a sTellar seCTor
Once you’ve decided to forge your own piece of the 
infinite void, you’ll want to grab a sheet of large-hex 
hex paper from one of the many templates available on-
line. First you’ll make a stellar map of the sector on this 
sheet, and then you’ll individually flesh out the worlds 
to whatever degree of fineness your needs require.
One crucial thing to remember at this stage of 
creation is that you do not have to create everything. You 
don’t need to answer every question about the sector or 
have every world in adventure-ready condition. Right 
now you’re just laying down broad strokes and rough 
colors to the sector, and when it comes time to do detail 
work you’ll save it for the worlds that matter most to 
your immediate needs.
Every GM has a limited supply of time, energy, 
and creative inspiration. If you try to fabricate an en-
tire complete sector in one go, with interesting planets 
and meaningful interstellar intrigue and easy adventure 
hooks all over the place, you’re likely to exhaust your-
self before you even get to play.
Instead, you should follow a simple guiding prin-
ciple whenever building anything for your campaign, 
whether a stellar sector or an adventure outline.
Am I having fun? If you’re enjoying yourself, then 
you can keep building. We follow this hobby because 
it’s fun, and if you’re enjoying the process then you 
should let yourself have your indulgence.
Am I going to need this for the next session?  If what 
you’re creating is something you know you’re going to 
need for the next game session, then you should finish 
it. Don’t let this feeling of obligation extend to every 
detail, however; it can be easy to imagine situations 
where you’ll need to elaborate some NPC or organiza-
tion or location, but if you respond to every such pos-
sibility you’ll never get away from the drawing board.
If you’re not having fun and you don’t need it for 
your next game session, stop it. You’re going to exhaust 
yourself on minutiae and trivia and not have the energy 
to do the parts you really do need, or the vigor needed 
to actually run this for the group.
With that principle kept firmly in mind, it’s time 
to start building the sector.
Place the Stars
The standard sector map is a grid of hexagons 8 wide by 
10 high, with hex templates easily acquired from the net. 
Roll 1d10 and add 20 to determine the total number of 
stars in the sector, or simply choose a number that suits.
For the first twenty or so stars, roll 1d8 and 1d10 
together to determine the column and row in which 
to place the star. If the hex is already occupied, place it 
adjacent in the direction of the nearest edge.
Some columns have “half-hexes” in them, and only 
9 full hexes; if you roll a 10 for such a column, either 
reroll or place it at the bottom-most full hex.
Once you’ve placed the randomly-positioned 
stars, add the remainder to connect any stellar clumps 
or groupings. Remember that standard postech spike 
drives can’t reach more than 3 hexes, so any cluster that 
can’t be reached with such a drill will be inaccessible to 
anything but pretech-grade drives.
The stellar map you’ve just created is an abstrac -
tion, one reflecting the eddies and currents of meta -
dimensional space. The individual stars might look 
adjacent on the map, but some may be vast distances 
apart. If you’d prefer to use more realistic star maps, 
you can grab some three-dimensional star map off the 
web and convert a convenient number of light years 
into a single “hex” of distance for spike drive purposes.
Lay Down the Primary Worlds
With the stars placed, it’s time to place the primary 
inhabited worlds. While it’s possible to declare that 
a star is orbited only by barren rocks, such stars are 
more difficult to make useful as places of adventure 
and gameable fun.
Right now, assume that each inhabited system has 
a single primary world. The original colonists would 
have naturally sought out the best, most habitable 
world for their founding. As a consequence, however 
nasty the primary world is, the others in the system 
are probably even worse. If you wish to add additional 
planets to the system later, you can do so, but for now 
you’ll want to focus on just one.
Start by rolling two world tags for each planet. 
World tags are simple tropes that reflect the most im-
portant qualities about the world, or at least those qual-
ities most important to adventurers. A list of a hundred 
potential world tags starts on page 132.
It’s most convenient to roll world tags for each 
planet before moving on to the other elements of the 
world, so you spend less time flipping back and forth 
between the sections. Don’t worry about making the 
tags make sense yet. Just note them down and go on.
Next, roll the atmospheres for each world. In this 
and the following steps, you can either reroll results 
that make no sense in light of the world tags you’ve 
generated, or simply pick a result that fits. If you’re 
feeling more adventurous, however, you can try to 
think of an explanation that reconciles seemingly in -
commensurate results.
After you roll atmospheres for each planet, repeat 
the process for temperature, biosphere, population, 
and tech level. Optionally, you can go on to add addi-
tional planets or points of interest to each system.
Finally, tack on a name for the planet and give it a 
sentence worth of description. You don’t need to flesh 
it out fully right now. Just note down whatever rough 
idea of it comes to mind from its world tags, population, 
and other planetary qualities.
===== PAGE 135 =====
SeCtor Creation •13 1 
Mark Polities and Trade Routes
Identify the star systems that are in contact with each 
other and draw lines of communication between them. 
Remember that any gap of 4 or more hexes can’t be 
crossed without pretech spike drives, so any contact 
between distant clusters will have to be through an 
intermediate world.
Worlds in contact with each other may not neces-
sarily be friendly, but they do know about each other 
and have at least a basic understanding of local con -
ditions. Some provision is usually made for foreign 
visitors from these other worlds, even if it’s nothing 
more than a strictly-monitored starport housing unit.
If two or more planets seem like they ought to 
belong to the same interstellar polity, sketch out a “bor-
der” around the grouping. Most TL4 worlds would be 
very hard-pressed to mount an effective interstellar 
invasion of a peer world, so these polities have likely 
formed out of diplomatic or cultural ties, or consist of 
a local hegemon exerting its rule over planets too weak 
or primitive to resist their influence.
Many sectors will have no multi-system govern -
ments of any kind. The individual worlds might be too 
independent, or the recovery of spaceflight technology 
may have been too recent to allow for ties of mutual 
governance to form yet. Such disjointed sectors can 
make life easier for the typical band of PCs, as escape 
into a new system means escape from the legal jurisdic-
tion of a world they may have recently offended.
Build Out the Important Worlds
Most of the worlds in your sector don’t need anything 
more than what you’ve already given them. A few 
worlds need more elaborate detail, however, and for 
these you’ll want to make use of a separate planetary 
record sheet for the world.
Only detail worlds that you’re going to need for 
the next session. In this case, that means you should 
detail the world that the campaign starts on and those 
worlds that the PCs might end up traveling to at the 
end of the first session. For most purposes, this just 
means the starting world and its immediate neighbors.
First, pick a rough cultural template for the world. 
Maybe it has a Latin American flavor, or was founded 
by Russian colonists, or was an outpost of Byzantine 
Empire enthusiasts. This culture has doubtless changed 
drastically since its initial founding, but it gives you a 
baseline for assigning names to people and places, iden-
tifying the common language spoken on the planet, and 
giving you enough information to describe local foods, 
architectural styles, and small slice-of-life elements.
You can always take the time to create an entirely 
new hybrid culture, but whatever you make or choose 
should be clear enough in your mind to let you give 
quick answers to sudden questions about cultural val -
ues or local habits. Again, it’s not critical to worry about 
historical accuracy; these worlds have had centuries to 
form their own worldviews and local customs.
Next, use the world tags to create adventure com-
ponents. Each tag includes different example Enemies, 
Friends, Complications, Things, and Places. Take an 
Enemy from both world tags or create one for each, and 
merge them together into a single antagonist. Thus, a 
Feral World with Heavy Industry might have a cannibal 
oligarch who literally lives on the flesh and blood of his 
slave laborers. Give this Enemy a name and a sentence 
of description.
Repeat the process for a Friend, a Complication, 
a Thing, and a Place. You don’t necessarily need to use 
both tags in every instance, and you’ll likely want to 
make up your own components inspired by the tags, 
but you should have at least one item in each category 
written down on the planetary record. You’ll use these 
raw elements later to create a starting adventure for 
your band of star-faring freebooters.
Lastly, take a few minutes to answer some critical 
questions about the planet, noting the answers down 
in the cultural section of the sheet.
What does this world have that the PCs might care 
about? Does it export a valuable and portable commod-
ity, or provide a special tech, or have unique job oppor-
tunities for expendable offworlder adventurers?
What is the biggest conflict on the world right 
now? Is it a social struggle between classes, tension 
with offworlder merchants or visitors, a war going on 
among local governments, or some other big crisis? 
Every world should have at least one obvious conflict 
that the PCs might choose to engage or be pulled into.
What do they think about outsiders? Are they 
comfortable with offworlders, do they view them with 
unusual mistrust, or are they outright xenophobic?
What is law enforcement like? Are there special 
laws that might tangle the PCs? If the PCs break a law, 
what kind of enforcement can they expect?
Where do the PCs land? What’s the name of the 
major starport on the world, and does the starport have 
any special deficiencies or unique opportunities?
You can flesh out a world beyond these questions 
if you wish, but they provide a bare minimum of data.
Choose Factions and Relations
Lastly, look at what you’ve created and determine 
the relationships between the starting world and its 
neighbors. Also, decide on the relationships between 
any polities you’ve established. Open interstellar war-
fare is very hard for a lone TL4 world to sustain, but 
a powerful planet or combine might be able to do it. 
More likely are cold wars of spies and saboteurs.
You may decide to establish one or more Factions 
to help give some independent motion to the sector’s 
background. Two or three Factions are plenty for the 
start of a campaign, and you should feel free to make 
new ones or let old ones fall inactive as the game pro-
gresses. Rules for Factions start on page 210.
And with that, your sector is ready for play. The 
Adventure Creation chapter gives the next step.
===== PAGE 136 =====
132• World tagS
d100 Tag d100 Tag d100 Tag d100 Tag
1 Abandoned Colony 26 Flying Cities 51 Misandry/Misogyny 76 Rigid Culture
2 Alien Ruins 27 Forbidden Tech 52 Night World 77 Rising Hegemon
3 Altered Humanity 28 Former Warriors 53 Nomads 78 Ritual Combat
4 Anarchists 29 Freak Geology 54 Oceanic World 79 Robots
5 Anthropomorphs 30 Freak Weather 55 Out of Contact 80 Seagoing Cities
6 Area 51 31 Friendly Foe 56 Outpost World 81 Sealed Menace
7 Badlands World 32 Gold Rush 57 Perimeter Agency 82 Secret Masters
8 Battleground 33 Great Work 58 Pilgrimage Site 83 Sectarians
9 Beastmasters 34 Hatred 59 Pleasure World 84 Seismic Instability
10 Bubble Cities 35 Heavy Industry 60 Police State 85 Shackled World
11 Cheap Life 36 Heavy Mining 61 Post-Scarcity 86 Societal Despair
12 Civil War 37 Hivemind 62 Preceptor Archive 87 Sole Supplier
13 Cold War 38 Holy War 63 Pretech Cultists 88 Taboo Treasure
14 Colonized Population 39 Hostile Biosphere 64 Primitive Aliens 89 Terraform Failure
15 Cultural Power 40 Hostile Space 65 Prison Planet 90 Theocracy
16 Cybercommunists 41 Immortals 66 Psionics Academy 91 Tomb World
17 Cyborgs 42 Local Specialty 67 Psionics Fear 92 Trade Hub
18 Cyclical Doom 43 Local Tech 68 Psionics Worship 93 Tyranny
19 Desert World 44 Major Spaceyard 69 Quarantined World 94 Unbraked AI
20 Doomed World 45 Mandarinate 70 Radioactive World 95 Urbanized Surface
21 Dying Race 46 Mandate Base 71 Refugees 96 Utopia
22 Eugenic Cult 47 Maneaters 72 Regional Hegemon 97 Warlords
23 Exchange Consulate 48 Megacorps 73 Restrictive Laws 98 Xenophiles
24 Fallen Hegemon 49 Mercenaries 74 Revanchists 99 Xenophobes
25 Feral World 50 Minimal Contact 75 Revolutionaries 00 Zombies
assIgnIng World Tags
The first step in world creation, and perhaps the most 
important, lies in assigning “tags” to the world. Tags 
are brief conceptual tropes that set the world off from 
planets of otherwise similar population and character-
istics. You can either pick from the tag table to select 
qualities that sound interesting for a world, or else roll 
percentile dice to select them randomly.
In general, you should pick or roll two tags for 
any given world. Using a single tag can leave a plan -
et feeling somewhat flat and one-dimensional, while 
using three or more can end up muddying the feel of 
the world. The goal of the tags is not to automatical -
ly combine into some intricately sophisticated world 
model, but to provide some clear, bright elements to 
relate to the PCs. Tags can randomly give you “desert 
planet torn by civil war”, from which you can then cre-
ate “an arid world riven by factional disputes between 
fragmented clans, the families based around ownership 
of irreplaceable pre-Scream moisture collectors”.
Tags are meant to simplify your life as a GM. They 
provide quick, simple hooks for adventure and cultural 
characterization to help distinguish the myriad worlds 
of your campaign from each other.
Each tag includes associated entries for Enemies, 
Friends, Complications, Things, and Places that fit with 
that tag. GMs can combine the elements of the two 
tags to create ones flavored specifically for that world. 
For example, two random tags for a world might be 
“Regional Hegemon” and “Psionics Fear”. Combining 
the “Colonial Official” and “Mental Purity Investiga -
tor” entries from the enemies lists of those tags, we 
come up with Heinrich Stalt, Imperial Mind Proctor, 
a grim inquisitor dispatched to the worlds under Im -
perial “protection” to purge them of the awful curse of 
psionically-active monsters.
These NPCs, objects, places, and situations can 
be used as raw grist for generating your adventures or 
be slotted into the scenario seeds provided later in the 
Adventure Generation chapter. Of course, not every 
Enemy will be intrinsically hostile to the PCs, nor every 
Friend necessarily a sympathetic figure.
Naturally, you should feel free to come up with 
your own tags as well. Almost any science-fiction trope 
that you enjoy can be turned into a tag, and charac -
teristic elements can be blended into the list of raw 
adventure components.
===== PAGE 137 =====
World tagS •133 
Abandoned Colony
The world once hosted a colony, whether human or 
otherwise, until some crisis or natural disaster drove 
the inhabitants away or killed them off. The colony 
might have been mercantile in nature, an expedition 
to extract valuable local resources, or it might have 
been a reclusive cabal of zealots. The remains of the 
colony are usually in ruins, and might still be dan -
gerous from the aftermath of whatever destroyed it 
in the first place.
E Crazed survivors, Ruthless plunderers of the 
ruins, Automated defense system
F Inquisitive stellar archaeologist, Heir to the col-
ony’s property, Local wanting the place cleaned 
out and made safe
C The local government wants the ruins to remain 
a secret, The locals claim ownership of it, The 
colony is crumbling and dangerous to navigate
T Long-lost property deeds, Relic stolen by the 
colonists when they left, Historical record of 
the colonization attempt
P Decaying habitation block, Vine-covered town 
square, Structure buried by an ancient landslide
Alien Ruins
The world has significant alien ruins present. The 
locals may or may not permit others to investigate 
the ruins, and may make it difficult to remove any 
objects of value without substantial payment. Any 
surviving ruins with worthwhile salvage almost cer-
tainly have some defense or hazard to explain their 
unplundered state.
E Customs inspector, Worshipper of the ruins, 
Hidden alien survivor
F Curious scholar, Avaricious local resident, In -
terstellar smuggler
C Traps in the ruins, Remote location, Paranoid 
customs officials
T Precious alien artifacts, Objects left with the 
remains of a prior unsuccessful expedition, Un-
translated alien texts, Untouched hidden ruins
P Undersea ruin, Orbital ruin, Perfectly preserved 
alien building, Alien mausoleum
Altered Humanity
The humans on this world are visibly and drastical -
ly different from normal humanity. They may have 
additional limbs, new sensory organs, or other sig -
nificant changes. Were these from ancestral eugenic 
manipulation, strange stellar mutations, or from an 
environmental toxin unique to this world?
E Biochauvinist local, Local experimenter, Men -
tally unstable mutant
F Local seeking a “cure”, Curious xenophiliac, An-
thropological researcher
C Alteration is contagious, Alteration is necessary 
for long-term survival, Locals fear and mistrust 
non-local humans
T Original pretech mutagenic equipment, Valu -
able biological byproduct from the mutants, 
“Cure” for the altered genes, Record of the orig-
inal colonial genotypes
P Abandoned eugenics laboratory, An environ -
ment requiring the mutation for survival, A 
sacred site where the first local was transformed
Anarchists
Rather than being an incidental anarchy of struggling 
tribes and warring factions, this world actually has a 
functional society with no centralized authority. Au-
thority might be hyper-localized to extended families, 
specific religious parishes, or voluntary associations. 
Some force is preventing an outside group or internal 
malcontents from coalescing into a power capable of 
imposing its rule on the locals; this force might be an 
ancient pretech defense system, a benevolent military 
AI, or the sheer obscurity and isolation of the culture.
E Offworlder imperialist, Reformer seeking to 
impose “good government”, Exploiter taking 
advantage of the lack of centralized resistance
F Proud missionary for anarchy, Casual local free 
spirit, Curious offworlder political scientist
C The anarchistic structure is compelled by an 
external power, The anarchy is enabled by cur -
rently abundant resources, The protecting force 
that shelters the anarchy is waning
T A macguffin that would let the possessor enforce 
their rule on others, A vital resource needed to 
preserve general liberty, Tech forbidden as dis-
ruptive to the social order
P
Community of similar-sized homes, Isolated 
clan homestead, Automated mining site
===== PAGE 138 =====
134• World tagS
Anthropomorphs
The locals were originally human, but at some point 
became anthropomorphic, either as an ancient furry 
colony, a group of animal-worshiping sectarians, or 
gengineers who just happened to find animal ele -
ments most convenient for surviving on the world. 
Depending on the skill of the original gengineers, 
their feral forms may or may not work as well as their 
original human bodies, or may come with drawbacks 
inherited from their animal elements.
E Anthro-supremacist local, Native driven by feral 
urges, Outside exploiter who sees the locals as 
subhuman creatures
F Fascinated genetic researcher, Diplomat trained 
to deal with normals, Local needing outside help
C The locals consider their shapes a curse from 
their foolish ancestors, Society is ordered ac -
cording to animal forms, The locals view normal 
humans as repulsive or inferior
T Pretech gengineering tech, A “cure” that may not 
be wanted, Sacred feral totem
P Shrine to a feral deity, Nature preserve suited to 
an animal type, Living site built to take advan -
tage of animal traits
Area 51
The world’s government is fully aware of their local 
stellar neighbors, but the common populace has no 
idea about it- and the government means to keep 
it that way. Trade with government officials in re-
mote locations is possible, but any attempt to clue the 
commoners in on the truth will be met with lethal 
reprisals.
E Suspicious government minder, Free merchant 
who likes his local monopoly, Local who wants 
a specimen for dissection
F Crusading offworld investigator, Conspira -
cy-theorist local, Idealistic government reformer
C The government has a good reason to keep the 
truth concealed, The government ruthlessly op-
presses the natives, The government is actually 
composed of offworlders
T Elaborate spy devices, Memory erasure tech, 
Possessions of the last offworlder who decided 
to spread the truth
P Desert airfield, Deep subterranean bunker, Hid-
den mountain valley
===== PAGE 139 =====
World tagS •135 
Badlands World
Whatever the original climate and atmosphere type, 
something horrible happened to this world. Bio -
logical, chemical, or nanotechnical weaponry has 
reduced it to a wretched hellscape. Some local life 
might still be able to survive on its blasted surface, 
usually at some dire cost in health or humanity.
E Mutated badlands fauna, Desperate local, Bad -
lands raider chief
F Native desperately wishing to escape the world, 
Scientist researching ecological repair methods, 
Ruin scavenger
C Radioactivity, Bioweapon traces, Broken terrain, 
Sudden local plague
T Maltech research core, Functional pretech 
weaponry, An uncontaminated well
P Untouched oasis, Ruined city, Salt flat
Battleground
The world is a battleground for two or more outside 
powers. They may be interstellar rivals, or groups 
operating out of orbitals or other system bodies. 
Something about the planet is valuable enough for 
them to fight over, but the natives are too weak to be 
anything but animate obstacles to the fight.
E Ruthless military commander, Looter pack 
chieftain, Traitorous collaborator
F Native desperately seeking protection, Pragmat-
ic military officer, Hapless war orphan
C The war just ended as both sides are leaving, The 
natives somehow brought this on themselves, A 
small group of natives profit tremendously from 
the fighting
T A cache of the resource the invaders seek, Aban-
doned prototype military gear, Precious spy in-
telligence lost by someone
P Artillery-pocked wasteland, Reeking refugee 
camp, Burnt-out shell of a city
Beastmasters
The natives have extremely close bonds with the local 
fauna, possibly having special means of communica-
tion and control through tech or gengineering. Local 
animal life plays a major role in their society, indus-
try, or warfare, and new kinds of beasts may be bred 
to suit their purposes.
E Half-feral warlord of a beast swarm, Coldly in-
human scientist, Altered beast with human in-
tellect and furious malice
F Native bonded with an adorable animal, Herder 
of very useful beasts, Animal-revering mystic
C The “animals” are very heavily gengineered hu -
mans, The animals actually run the society, The 
animals have the same rights as humans
T Tech used to alter animal life, A plague vial that 
could wipe out the animals, A pretech device 
that can perform a wonder if operated by a beast
P Park designed as a comfortable home for beasts, 
Public plaza designed to accommodate animal 
companions, Factory full of animal workers
Bubble Cities
Whether due to a lack of atmosphere or an uninhab-
itable climate, the world’s cities exist within domes or 
pressurized buildings. In such sealed environments, 
techniques of surveillance and control can grow ba-
roque and extreme.
E
Native dreading outsider contamination, Sab -
oteur from another bubble city, Local official 
hostile to outsider ignorance of laws
F Local rebel against the city officials, Mainte -
nance chief in need of help, Surveyor seeking 
new building sites
C Bubble rupture, Failing atmosphere reproces -
sor, Native revolt against officials, All-seeing 
surveillance cameras
T Pretech habitat technology, Valuable industrial 
products, Master key codes to a city’s security 
system
P City power core, Surface of the bubble, Hydro -
ponics complex, Warren-like hab block
===== PAGE 140 =====
136• World tagS
Cheap Life
Human life is near-worthless on this world. Ubiqui -
tous cloning, local conditions that ensure early death, 
a culture that reveres murder, or a social structure 
that utterly discounts the value of most human lives 
ensures that death is the likely outcome for any ac -
tion that irritates someone consequential. 
E Master assassin, Bloody-handed judge, Overseer 
of disposable clones
F Endearing local whose life the PCs accidental-
ly bought, Escapee from death seeking outside 
help, Reformer trying to change local mores
C Radiation or local diseases ensure all locals die 
before twenty-five years of age, Tech ensures 
that death is just an annoyance, Locals are totally 
convinced of a blissful afterlife
T Device that revives or re-embodies the dead, 
Maltech engine fueled by human life, Priceless 
treasure held by a now-dead owner
P Thronging execution ground, extremely curso -
ry cemetery, Factory full of lethal dangers that 
could be corrected easily
Civil War
The world is currently torn between at least two op-
posing factions, all of which claim legitimacy. The 
war may be the result of a successful rebel uprising 
against tyranny, or it might just be the result of 
schemers who plan to be the new masters once the 
revolution is complete.
E Faction commissar, Angry native, Conspiracy 
theorist who blames offworlders for the war, 
Deserter looking out for himself, Guerrilla ban-
dit chieftain
F Faction loyalist seeking aid, Native caught in 
the crossfire, Offworlder seeking passage off 
the planet
C The front rolls over the group, Famine strikes, 
Bandit infestations are in the way
T Ammo dump, Military cache, Treasure buried 
for after the war, Secret war plans
P Battle front, Bombed-out town, Rear-area red 
light zone, Propaganda broadcast tower
Cold War
Two or more great powers control the planet, and 
they have a hostility to each other that’s just barely 
less than open warfare. The hostility might be ideo-
logical in nature, or it might revolve around control 
of some local resource.
E Suspicious chief of intelligence, Native who 
thinks the outworlders are with the other side, 
Femme fatale
F Apolitical information broker, Spy for the other 
side, Unjustly accused innocent, “He’s a bastard, 
but he’s our bastard” official
C Police sweep, Low-level skirmishing, “Red scare”
T List of traitors in government, secret military 
plans, Huge cache of weapons built up in prepa-
ration for war
P Seedy bar in a neutral area, Political rally, Isolat-
ed area where fighting is underway
Colonized Population
A neighboring world has successfully colonized this 
less-advanced or less-organized planet, and the na -
tives aren’t happy about it. A puppet government 
may exist, but all real decisions are made by the local 
viceroy.
E Suspicious security personnel, Offworlder-hat -
ing natives, Local crime boss preying on rich 
offworlders
F Native resistance leader, Colonial official seek -
ing help, Native caught between the two sides
C Natives won’t talk to offworlders, Colonial re -
pression, Misunderstood local customs
T Relic of the resistance movement, List of collab-
orators, Precious substance extracted by colonial 
labor
P Deep wilderness resistance camp, City district 
off-limits to natives, Colonial labor site
===== PAGE 141 =====
World tagS •137 
Cultural Power
The world is a considerable cultural power in the 
sector, producing music, art, philosophy, or some 
similar intangible that their neighbors find irresist -
ibly attractive. Other worlds might have a profound 
degree of cultural cachet as the inheritor of some 
venerable artistic tradition.
E Murderously eccentric artist, Crazed fan, Failed 
artist with an obsessive grudge, Critic with a 
crusade to enact
F Struggling young artist, Pupil of the artistic tra-
dition, Scholar of the art, Offworlder hating the 
source of corrupting alien ways
C The art is slowly lethal to its masters, The art 
is mentally or physically addictive, The art is a 
fragment of ancient technical or military science
T The instrument of a legendary master, The only 
copy of a dead master’s opus, Proof of intellectu-
al property ownership
P Recording or performance studio, Public festi -
val choked with tourists, Monument to a dead 
master of the art
Cybercommunists
On this world communism actually works, thanks 
to pretech computing devices and greater or lesser 
amounts of psychic precognition. Central planning 
nodes direct all production and employment on the 
world. Citizens in good standing have access to ample 
amounts of material goods for all needs and many 
wants. Instead of strife over wealth, conflicts erupt 
over political controls, cultural precepts, or control 
over the planning nodes. Many cybercommunist 
worlds show a considerable bias toward the private 
interests of those who run the planning nodes.
E Embittered rebel against perceived unfairness, 
Offworlder saboteur, Aspiring Stalin-figure
F Idealistic planning node tech, Cynical anti-cor-
ruption cop, Precognitive economist
C The pretech planning computers are breaking 
down, The planning only works because the 
locals have been mentally or physically altered, 
The planning computers can’t handle the in -
creasing population within the system
T Planning node computer, Wildly destabilizing 
commodity that can’t be factored into plans, A 
tremendous store of valuables made by accident
P Humming factory, Apartment block of perfectly 
equal flats, Mass demonstration of unity
Cyborgs
The planet’s population makes heavy use of cyber -
netics, with many of the inhabitants possessing at 
least a cosmetic amount of chrome. This may be the 
result of a strong local cyber tech base, a religious 
injunction, or simply a necessary measure to survive 
the local conditions.
E Ambitious hacker of cyber implants, Cybertech 
oligarch, Researcher craving fresh offworlders, 
Cybered-up gang boss
F Charity-working implant physician, Idealistic 
young cyber researcher, Avant-garde activist
C The powerful and dangerous come here often 
for cutting-edge implants, The cyber has some 
universal negative side-effect, Cyber and those 
implanted with it are forbidden to leave the 
planet as a tech security measure
T Unique prototype cyber implant, Secret research 
files, A virus that debilitates cyborgs, A cache of 
critically-needed therapeutic cyber
P Grimy slum chop-shop, Bloody lair of implant 
rippers, Stark plaza where everyone is seeing 
things through their augmented-reality cyber
Cyclical Doom
The world regularly suffers some apocalyptic ca -
tastrophe that wipes out organized civilization on it. 
The local culture is aware of this cycle and has tra -
ditions to ensure a fragment of civilization survives 
into the next era, but these traditions don’t always 
work properly, and sometimes dangerous fragments 
of the past emerge.
E Offworlder seeking to trigger the apocalypse 
early for profit, Local recklessly taking advan -
tage of preparation stores, Demagogue claiming 
the cycle is merely a myth of the authorities
F Harried official working to prepare, Offworlder 
studying the cycles, Local threatened by perils of 
the cycle’s initial stages
C The cycles really are a myth of the authorities, 
The cycles are controlled by alien constructs, An 
outside power is interfering with preparation
T A lost cache of ancient treasures, Tech or ar -
chives that will pinpoint the cycle’s timing, Key-
codes to bypass an ancient vault’s security
P Lethally-defended vault of forgotten secrets, 
Starport crowded with panicked refugees, Town 
existing in the shadow of some monstrous mon-
ument to a former upheaval
===== PAGE 142 =====
138• World tagS
Desert World
The world may have a breathable atmosphere and a 
human-tolerable temperature range, but it is an arid, 
stony waste outside of a few places made habitable 
by human effort. The deep wastes are largely unex-
plored and inhabited by outcasts and worse.
E Raider chieftain, Crazed hermit, Angry isola -
tionists, Paranoid mineral prospector, Strange 
desert beast
F Native guide, Research biologist, Aspiring ter -
raformer
C Sandstorms, Water supply failure, Native war -
fare over water rights
T Enormous water reservoir, Map of hidden wells, 
Pretech rainmaking equipment
P Oasis, “The Empty Quarter” of the desert, Hid-
den underground cistern
Doomed World
The world is doomed, and the locals may or may not 
know it. Some cosmic catastrophe looms before them, 
and the locals have no realistic way to get everyone to 
safety. To the extent that the public is aware, society 
is disintegrating into a combination of religious fer-
vor, abject hedonism, and savage violence.
E Crazed prophet of a false salvation, Ruthless 
leader seeking to flee with their treasures, Cyn-
ical ship captain selling a one-way trip into hard 
vacuum as escape to another world
F Appealing waif or family head seeking escape, 
Offworld relief coordinator, Harried law officer
C The doom is false or won’t actually kill everyone, 
The doom was intentionally triggered by some-
one, Mass escape is possible if warring groups 
can somehow be brought to cooperate
T Clearance for a ship to leave the planet, A cache 
of priceless cultural artifacts, The life savings of 
someone trying to buy passage out, Data that 
would prove to the public the end is nigh
P Open square beneath a sky angry with a fore -
taste of th impending ruin, Orgiastic celebration 
involving sex and murder in equal parts, Holy 
site full of desperate petitioners to the divine
Dying Race
The inhabitants of this world are dying out, and they 
know it. Through environmental toxins, hostile 
bio-weapons, or sheer societal despair, the culture 
cannot replenish its numbers. Members seek mean-
ing in their own strange goals or peculiar faiths, 
though a few might struggle to find some way to 
reverse their slow yet inevitable doom.
E Hostile outsider who wants the locals dead, Off-
worlder seeking to take advantage of their weak-
ened state, Invaders eager to push the locals out 
of their former lands
F
One of the few youth among the population, 
Determined and hopeful reformer, Researcher 
seeking a new method of reproduction
C The dying culture’s values were monstrous, The 
race’s death is somehow necessary to prevent 
some grand catastrophe, The race is somehow 
convinced they deserve this fate
T Extremely valuable reproductive tech, Trea -
sured artifacts of the former age, Bioweapon 
used on the race
P City streets devoid of pedestrians, Mighty edifice 
now crumbling with disrepair, Small dwelling 
full of people in a town now otherwise empty
Eugenic Cult
Even in the days before the Silence, major improve-
ment of the human genome always seemed to come 
with unacceptable side-effects. Some worlds host 
secret cults that perpetuate these improvements 
regardless of the cost, and a few planets have been 
taken over entirely by the cults.
E Eugenic superiority fanatic, Mentally unstable 
homo superior, Mad eugenic scientist
F Eugenic propagandist, Biotechnical investigator, 
Local seeking revenge on cult
C The altered cultists look human, The locals are 
terrified of any unusual physical appearance, 
The genetic modifications- and drawbacks- are 
contagious with long exposure
T Serum that induces the alteration, Elixir that 
reverses the alteration, Pretech biotechnical da-
tabanks, List of secret cult sympathizers
P Eugenic breeding pit, Isolated settlement of 
altered humans, Public place infiltrated by cult 
sympathizers
===== PAGE 143 =====
World tagS •139 
Exchange Consulate
The Exchange of Light once served as the largest, 
most trusted banking and diplomatic service in hu -
man space. Even after the Silence, some worlds retain 
a functioning Exchange Consulate where banking 
services and arbitration can be arranged.
E Corrupt Exchange official, Indebted native 
who thinks the players are Exchange agents, 
Exchange official dunning the players for debts 
incurred
F Consul in need of offworld help, Local banker 
seeking to hurt his competition, Exchange dip-
lomat
C The local Consulate has been corrupted, the 
Consulate is cut off from its funds, A powerful 
debtor refuses to pay
T Exchange vault codes, Wealth hidden to con -
ceal it from a bankruptcy judgment, Location 
of forgotten vault
P Consulate meeting chamber, Meeting site be -
tween fractious disputants, Exchange vault
Fallen Hegemon
At some point in the past, this world was a hegemon-
ic power over some or all of the sector, thanks to su-
perior tech, expert diplomacy, the weakness of their 
neighbors, or inherited Mandate legitimacy. Some 
kind of crash or revolt broke their power, however, 
and now the world is littered with the wreckage of 
former glory.
E Bitter pretender to a meaningless throne, Re -
sentful official dreaming of empire, Vengeful 
offworlder seeking to punish their old rulers
F Realistic local leader trying to hold things to -
gether, Scholar of past glories, Refugee from an 
overthrown colonial enclave
C The hegemon’s rule was enlightened and fair, It 
collapsed due to its own internal strife rather 
than external resistance, It pretends that nothing 
has happened to its power, It’s been counter-col-
onized by vengeful outsiders
T Precious insignia of former rule, Relic tech im-
portant to its power, Plundered colonial artifact
P Palace far too grand for its current occupant, 
Oversized spaceport now in disrepair, Boule -
vard lined with monuments to past glories
===== PAGE 144 =====
140• World tagS
Feral World
In the long, isolated night of the Silence, some worlds 
have experienced total moral and cultural collapse. 
Whatever remains has been twisted beyond recogni-
tion into assorted death cults, xenophobic fanaticism, 
horrific cultural practices, or other behavior unac -
ceptable on more enlightened worlds. These worlds 
are almost invariably quarantined by other planets.
E Decadent noble, Mad cultist, Xenophobic local, 
Cannibal chief, Maltech researcher
F Trapped outworlder, Aspiring reformer, Native 
wanting to avoid traditional flensing
C Horrific local “celebration”, Inexplicable and re-
pugnant social rules, Taboo zones and people
T Terribly misused piece of pretech, Wealth ac -
cumulated through brutal evildoing, Valuable 
possession owned by luckless outworlder victim
P Atrocity amphitheater, Traditional torture par-
lor, Ordinary location twisted into something 
terrible.
Flying Cities
Perhaps the world is a gas giant, or plagued with un-
endurable storms at lower levels of the atmosphere. 
For whatever reason, the cities of this world fly 
above the surface of the planet. Perhaps they remain 
stationary, or perhaps they move from point to point 
in search of resources.
E Rival city pilot, Tech thief attempting to steal 
outworld gear, Saboteur or scavenger plunder -
ing the city’s tech
F Maintenance tech in need of help, City defense 
force pilot, Meteorological researcher
C Sudden storms, Drastic altitude loss, Rival city 
attacks, Vital machinery breaks down
T Precious refined atmospheric gases, Pretech 
grav engine plans, Meteorological codex pre -
dicting future storms
P Underside of the city, The one calm place on 
the planet’s surface, Catwalks stretching over 
unimaginable gulfs below.
Forbidden Tech
Some group on this planet fabricates or uses maltech. 
Unbraked AIs doomed to metastasize into insanity, 
nation-destroying nanowarfare particles, slow-burn 
DNA corruptives, genetically engineered slaves, or 
something worse still. The planet’s larger population 
may or may not be aware of the danger in their midst.
E Mad scientist, Maltech buyer from offworld, Se-
curity enforcer
F Victim of maltech, Perimeter agent, Investiga -
tive reporter, Conventional arms merchant
C The maltech is being fabricated by an unbraked 
AI, The government depends on revenue from 
maltech sales to offworlders, Citizens insist that 
it’s not really maltech
T Maltech research data, The maltech itself, Pre -
cious pretech equipment used to create it
P Horrific laboratory, Hellscape sculpted by the 
maltech’s use, Government building meeting 
room
Former Warriors
The locals of this world were once famed for their 
martial prowess. They may have simply had a very 
militaristic culture, or were genetically engineered 
for combat, or developed high-tech weaponry, or had 
brilliant leadership. Those days are past, however, ei-
ther due to crushing defeat, external restrictions, or 
a cultural turn toward peace.
E Unreformed warlord leader, Bitter mercenary 
chief, Victim of their warfare seeking revenge
F Partisan of the new peaceful ways, Outsider des-
perate for military aid, Martial genius repressed 
by the new dispensation
C Neighboring worlds want them pacified or dead, 
They only ever used their arts in self-defense, 
The source of their gifts has been “turned off” in 
a reversible way
T War trophy taken from a defeated foe, Key to 
re-activating their martial ways, Secret cache of 
high-tech military gear
P Cemetery of dead heroes, Memorial hall now 
left to dust and silence, Monument plaza dedi -
cated to the new culture
===== PAGE 145 =====
World tagS •141 
Freak Geology
The geology or geography of this world is simply 
freakish. Perhaps it’s composed entirely of enormous 
mountain ranges, or regular bands of land and sea, or 
the mineral structures all fragment into perfect cubes. 
The locals have learned to deal with it and their cul -
ture will be shaped by its requirements.
E Crank xenogeologist, Cultist who believes it the 
work of aliens
F Research scientist, Prospector, Artist
C Local conditions that no one remembers to tell 
outworlders about, Lethal weather, Seismic ac-
tivity
T Unique crystal formations, Hidden veins of a 
major precious mineral strike, Deed to a loca -
tion of great natural beauty
P Atop a bizarre geological formation, Tourist re-
sort catering to offworlders
Freak Weather
The planet is plagued with some sort of bizarre or 
hazardous weather pattern. Perhaps city-flattening 
storms regularly scourge the surface, or the world’s 
sun never pierces its thick banks of clouds.
E Criminal using the weather as a cover, Weather 
cultists convinced the offworlders are responsi -
ble for some disaster, Native predators depen -
dent on the weather
F Meteorological researcher, Holodoc crew want-
ing shots of the weather
C The weather itself, Malfunctioning pretech ter-
raforming engines that cause the weather
T Wind-scoured deposits of precious minerals, 
Holorecords of a spectacularly and rare weather 
pattern, Naturally-sculpted objects of intricate 
beauty
P Eye of the storm, The one sunlit place, Terra -
forming control room
Friendly Foe
Some hostile alien race or malevolent cabal has a 
branch or sect on this world that is actually quite 
friendly toward outsiders. For whatever internal rea-
son, they are willing to negotiate and deal honestly 
with strangers, and appear to lack the worst impulses 
of their fellows.
E Driven hater of all their kind, Internal malcon-
tent bent on creating conflict, Secret master who 
seeks to lure trust
F Well-meaning bug-eyed monster, Principled 
eugenics cultist, Suspicious investigator
C The group actually is as harmless and benevolent 
as they seem, The group offers a vital service 
at the cost of moral compromise, The group 
still feels bonds of affiliation with their hostile 
brethren
T Forbidden xenotech, Eugenic biotech template, 
Evidence to convince others of their kind that 
they are right
P Repurposed maltech laboratory, Alien conclave 
building, Widely-feared starship interior
Gold Rush
Gold, silver, and other conventional precious min -
erals are common and cheap now that asteroid min-
ing is practical for most worlds. But some minerals 
and compounds remain precious and rare, and this 
world has recently been discovered to have a supply 
of them. People from across the sector have come to 
strike it rich.
E Paranoid prospector, Aspiring mining tycoon, 
Rapacious merchant
F Claim-jumped miner, Native alien, Curious 
tourist
C The strike is a hoax, The strike is of a dangerous 
toxic substance, Export of the mineral is prohib-
ited by the planetary government, The native 
aliens live around the strike’s location
T Cases of the refined element, Pretech mining 
equipment, A dead prospector’s claim deed
P Secret mine, Native alien village, Processing 
plant, Boom town
===== PAGE 146 =====
142• World tagS
Great Work
The locals are obsessed with completing a massive 
project, one that has consumed them for genera -
tions. It might be the completion of a functioning 
spaceyard, a massive solar power array, a network of 
terraforming engines, or the universal conversion of 
their neighbors to their own faith. The purpose of 
their entire civilization is to progress and some day 
complete the work.
E Local planning to sacrifice the PCs for the work, 
Local who thinks the PCs threaten the work, 
Obsessive zealot ready to destroy someone or 
something important to the PCs for the sake of 
the work
F Outsider studying the work, Local with a more 
temperate attitude, Supplier of work materials
C The work is totally hopeless, Different factions 
disagree on what the work is, An outside power 
is determined to thwart the work
T Vital supplies for the work, Plans that have been 
lost, Tech that greatly speeds the work
P A bustling work site, Ancestral worker housing, 
Local community made only semi-livable by the 
demands of the work
Hatred
For whatever reason, this world’s populace has a 
burning hatred for the inhabitants of a neighboring 
system. Perhaps this world was colonized by exiles, or 
there was a recent interstellar war, or ideas of racial 
or religious superiority have fanned the hatred. Re -
gardless of the cause, the locals view their neighbor 
and any sympathizers with loathing.
E Native convinced that the offworlders are agents 
of Them, Cynical politician in need of scape -
goats
F Intelligence agent needing catspaws, Holodoc 
producers needing “an inside look”, Unlucky 
offworlder from the hated system
C The characters are wearing or using items from 
the hated world, The characters are known to 
have done business there, The characters “look 
like” the hated others
T Proof of Their evildoing, Reward for turning in 
enemy agents, Relic stolen by Them years ago
P War crimes museum, Atrocity site, Captured 
and decommissioned spaceship kept as a trophy
Heavy Industry
With interstellar transport so limited in the bulk it 
can move, worlds have to be largely self-sufficient 
in industry. Some worlds are more sufficient than 
others, however, and this planet has a thriving man-
ufacturing sector capable of producing large amounts 
of goods appropriate to its tech level. The locals may 
enjoy a correspondingly higher lifestyle, or the prod-
ucts might be devoted towards vast projects for the 
aggrandizement of the rulers.
E Tycoon monopolist, Industrial spy, Malcontent 
revolutionary
F
Aspiring entrepreneur, Worker union leader, 
Ambitious inventor
C The factories are toxic, The resources extract -
able at their tech level are running out, The 
masses require the factory output for survival, 
The industries’ major output is being obsoleted 
by offworld tech
T Confidential industrial data, Secret union mem-
bership lists, Ownership shares in an industrial 
complex
P Factory floor, Union meeting hall, Toxic waste 
dump, R&D complex
Heavy Mining
This world has large stocks of valuable minerals, 
usually necessary for local industry, life support, or 
refinement into loads small enough to export off -
world. Major mining efforts are necessary to extract 
the minerals, and many natives work in the industry.
E Mine boss, Tunnel saboteur, Subterranean 
predators
F Hermit prospector, Offworld investor, Miner’s 
union representative
C The refinery equipment breaks down, Tunnel 
collapse, Silicate life forms growing in the min-
ers’ lungs
T The mother lode, Smuggled case of refined min-
eral, Faked crystalline mineral samples
P Vertical mine face, Tailing piles, Roaring smelt-
ing complex
===== PAGE 147 =====
World tagS •143 
Hivemind
Natives of this world exist in a kind of mental gestalt, 
sharing thoughts and partaking of a single identity. 
Powerful pretech, exotic psionics, alien influence, or 
some other cause has left the world sharing one iden-
tity. Individual members may have greater or lesser 
degrees of effective coordination with the whole.
E A hivemind that wants to assimilate outsiders, A 
hivemind that has no respect for unjoined life, A 
hivemind that fears and hates unjoined life 
F A scholar studying the hivemind, A person sev-
ered from the gestalt, A relative of someone who 
has been assimilated
C The hivemind only functions on this world, The 
hivemind has strict range limits, The hivemind 
has different personality factions, The hivemind 
only happens at particular times, The world is 
made of semi-sentient drones and a single AI
T Vital tech for maintaining the mind, Precious 
treasure held by now-assimilated outsider, Tech 
that “blinds” the hivemind to the tech’s users
P Barely tolerable living cells for individuals, 
Workside where individuals casually die in their 
labors, Community with absolutely no social or 
group-gathering facilities
Holy War
A savage holy war is raging on this world, either be-
tween factions of locals or as a united effort against 
the pagans of some neighboring world. This war 
might involve a conventional religion, or it might be 
the result of a branding campaign, political ideology, 
artistic movement, or any other cause that people use 
as a substitute for traditional religion.
E Blood-mad pontiff, Coldly cynical secular leader, 
Totalitarian political demagogue
F Desperate peacemaker, Hard-pressed refugee of 
the fighting, Peaceful religious leader who lost 
the internal debate
C The targets of the war really are doing some -
thing diabolically horrible, The holy war is just a 
mask for a very traditional casus belli, The lead-
ers don’t want the war won but only prolonged, 
Both this world and the target of the war are 
religion-obsessed
T Sacred relic of the faith, A captured blasphemer 
under a death sentence, Plunder seized in battle
P Massive holy structure, Razed community of 
infidels, Vast shrine to the martyrs dead in war
Hostile Biosphere
The world is teeming with life, and it hates humans. 
Perhaps the life is xenoallergenic, forcing filter masks 
and tailored antiallergens for survival. It could be the 
native predators are huge and fearless, or the toxic 
flora ruthlessly outcompetes earth crops.
E Local fauna, Nature cultist, Native aliens, Cal -
lous labor overseer
F Xenobiologist, Tourist on safari, Grizzled local 
guide
C Filter masks fail, Parasitic alien infestation, Crop 
greenhouses lose bio-integrity
T Valuable native biological extract, Abandoned 
colony vault, Remains of an unsuccessful expe-
dition
P Deceptively peaceful glade, Steaming poly -
chrome jungle, Nightfall when surrounded by 
Things
Hostile Space
The system in which the world exists is a dangerous 
neighborhood. Something about the system is per -
ilous to inhabitants, either through meteor swarms, 
stellar radiation, hostile aliens in the asteroid belt, or 
periodic comet clouds.
E Alien raid leader, Meteor-launching terrorists, 
Paranoid local leader
F Astronomic researcher, Local defense com -
mander, Early warning monitor agent
C The natives believe the danger is divine chas -
tisement, The natives blame outworlders for the 
danger, The native elite profit from the danger 
in some way
T Early warning of a raid or impact, Abandoned 
riches in a disaster zone, Key to a secure bunker
P City watching an approaching asteroid, Village 
burnt in an alien raid, Massive ancient crater
===== PAGE 148 =====
144• World tagS
Immortals
Natives of this world are effectively immortal. They 
may have been gengineered for tremendous lifespans, 
or have found some local anagathic, or be cyborg life 
forms, or be so totally convinced of reincarnation 
that death is a cultural irrelevance. Any immortality 
technique is likely applicable only to them, or else 
it’s apt to be a massive draw to outside imperialists.
E Outsider determined to steal immortality, Smug 
local convinced of their immortal wisdom to 
rule all, Offworlder seeking the world’s ruin 
before it becomes a threat to all
F Curious longevity researcher, Thrill-seeking 
local, 
C Immortality requires doing something that out-
siders can’t or won’t willingly do, The immor -
tality ends if they leave the world, Death is the 
punishment for even minor crimes, Immortals 
must die or go offworld after a certain span, Im-
mortality has brutal side-effects
T Immortality drug, Masterwork of an ageless ar-
tisan, Toxin that only affects immortals
P Community with no visible children, Unchang-
ing structure of obvious ancient age, Cultural 
performance relying on a century of in-jokes
Local Specialty
The world may be sophisticated or barely capable of 
steam engines, but either way it produces something 
rare and precious to the wider galaxy. It might be 
some pharmaceutical extract produced by a secret 
recipe, a remarkably popular cultural product, or 
even gengineered humans uniquely suited for cer -
tain work.
E Monopolist, Offworlder seeking prohibition of 
the specialty, Native who views the specialty as 
sacred
F Spy searching for the source, Artisan seeking 
protection, Exporter with problems
C The specialty is repugnant in nature, The craft -
ers refuse to sell to offworlders, The specialty is 
made in a remote, dangerous place, The crafters 
don’t want to make the specialty any more
T The specialty itself, The secret recipe, Sample of 
a new improved variety
P Secret manufactory, Hidden cache, Artistic com-
petition for best artisan
Local Tech
The locals can create a particular example of ex -
tremely high tech, possibly even something that ex-
ceeds pretech standards. They may use unique local 
resources to do so, or have stumbled on a narrow 
scientific breakthrough, or still have a functional ex-
perimental manufactory.
E Keeper of the tech, Offworld industrialist, Auto-
mated defenses that suddenly come alive, Native 
alien mentors
F Curious offworld scientist, Eager tech buyer, 
Native in need of technical help
C The tech is unreliable, The tech only works on 
this world, The tech has poorly-understood side 
effects, The tech is alien in nature.
T The tech itself, An unclaimed payment for a 
large shipment, The secret blueprints for its 
construction, An ancient alien R&D database
P Alien factory, Lethal R&D center, Tech broker -
age vault
Major Spaceyard
Most worlds of tech level 4 or greater have the nec-
essary tech and orbital facilities to build spike drives 
and starships. This world is blessed with a major 
spaceyard facility, either inherited from before the 
Silence or painstakingly constructed in more recent 
decades. It can build even capital-class hulls, and do 
so more quickly and cheaply than its neighbors.
E Enemy saboteur, Industrial spy, Scheming con-
struction tycoon, Aspiring ship hijacker
F Captain stuck in drydock, Maintenance chief, 
Mad innovator
C The spaceyard is an alien relic, The spaceyard 
is burning out from overuse, The spaceyard is 
alive, The spaceyard relies on maltech to func -
tion
T Intellectual property-locked pretech blueprints, 
Override keys for activating old pretech facilities, 
A purchased but unclaimed spaceship.
P Hidden shipyard bay, Surface of a partially-com-
pleted ship, Ship scrap graveyard
===== PAGE 149 =====
World tagS •145 
Mandarinate
The planet is ruled by an intellectual elite chosen via 
ostensibly neutral examinations or tests. The values 
this system selects for may or may not have anything 
to do with actual practical leadership skills, and the 
examinations may be more or less corruptible.
E Corrupt test administrator, Incompetent but 
highly-rated graduate, Ruthless leader of a clan 
of high-testing relations
F Crusader for test reform, Talented but poor -
ly-connected graduate, Genius who tests badly
C The test is totally unrelated to necessary gov -
erning skills, The test was very pertinent in the 
past but tech or culture has changed, The test 
is for a skill that is vital to maintaining society 
but irrelevant to day-to-day governance, The 
test is a sham and passage is based on wealth 
or influence
T Answer key to the next test, Lost essay of incred-
ible merit, Proof of cheating
P Massive structure full of test-taking cubicles, 
School filled with desperate students, Ornate 
government building decorated with scholarly 
quotes and academic images
Mandate Base
The Terran Mandate retained its control over this 
world for much longer than usual, and the world 
may still consider itself a true inheritor of Mandate 
legitimacy. Most of these worlds have or had superior 
technology, but they may still labor under the burden 
of ancient restrictive tech or monitoring systems de-
signed to prevent them from rebelling.
E Deranged Mandate monitoring AI, Aspiring 
sector ruler, Demagogue preaching local supe -
riority over “traitorous rebel worlds”.
F Idealistic do-gooder local, Missionary for ad -
vanced Mandate tech, Outsider seeking lost data 
from Mandate records
C The monitoring system forces the locals to be -
have in aggressive ways toward “rebel” worlds, 
The monitoring system severely hinders off -
world use of their tech, The original colonists 
are all dead and have been replaced by outsiders 
who don’t understand all the details
T Ultra-advanced pretech, Mandate military gear, 
Databank containing precious tech schematics
P Faded Mandate offices still in use, Vault con -
taining ancient pretech, Carefully-maintained 
monument to Mandate glory
Maneaters
The locals are cannibals, either out of necessity or out 
of cultural preference. Some worlds may actually eat 
human flesh, while others simply require the render-
ing of humans into important chemicals or pharma-
ceutical compounds, perhaps to prolong the lives of 
ghoul overlords. This cannibalism plays a major role 
in their society.
E Ruthless ghoul leader, Chieftain of a ravenous 
tribe, Sophisticated degenerate preaching the 
splendid authenticity of cannibalism
F Sympathetic local fleeing the fork, Escapee from 
a pharmaceutical rendering plant, Outsider cho-
sen for dinner, Reformer seeking to break the 
custom or its necessity
C Local food or environmental conditions make 
human consumption grimly necessary, The lo -
cals farm human beings, Outsiders are expected 
to join in the custom, The custom is totally un-
necessary but jealously maintained by the people
T Belongings of a recent meal, An offworlder VIP 
due for the menu, A toxin that makes human 
flesh lethal to consumers
P Hideous human abattoir, Extremely civilized 
restaurant, Funeral-home-cum-kitchen
Megacorps
The world is dominated by classic cyberpunk-esque 
megacorporations, each one far more important than 
the vestigial national remnants that encompass them. 
These megacorps are usually locked in a cold war, 
trading and dealing with each other even as they try 
to strike in deniable ways. An over-council of cor -
porations usually acts to bring into line any that get 
excessively overt in their activities.
E Megalomaniacal executive, Underling looking 
to use the PCs as catspaws, Ruthless mercenary 
who wants what the PCs have
F Victim of megacorp scheming, Offworlder 
merchant in far over their head, Local reformer 
struggling to cope with megacorp indifference
C The megacorps are the only source of some -
thing vital to life on this world, An autonomous 
Mandate system acts to punish excessively overt 
violence, The megacorps are struggling against 
much more horrible national governments
T Blackmail on a megacorp exec, Keycodes to criti-
cal corp secrets, Proof of corp responsibility for a 
heinously unacceptable public atrocity, Data on 
a vital new product line coming out soon
P A place plastered in megacorp ads, A public plaza 
discreetly branded, Private corp military base
===== PAGE 150 =====
146• World tagS
Mercenaries
The world is either famous for its mercenary bands 
or it is plagued by countless groups of condottieri 
in service to whatever magnate can afford to pay or 
bribe them adequately.
E Amoral mercenary leader, Rich offworlder try -
ing to buy rule of the world, Mercenary press 
gang chief forcing locals into service
F Young and idealistic mercenary chief, Harried 
leader of enfeebled national army, Offworlder 
trying to hire help for a noble cause
C The mercenaries are all that stand between the 
locals and a hungry imperial power, The mer -
cenaries are remnants of a former official army, 
The mercenaries hardly ever actually fight as 
compared to taking bribes to walk away
T Lost mercenary payroll shipment, Forbidden 
military tech, Proof of a band’s impending 
treachery against their employers
P Shabby camp of undisciplined mercs, Burnt-out 
village occupied by mercenaries, Luxurious and 
exceedingly well-defended merc leader villa
Misandry/Misogyny
The culture on this world holds a particular gender in 
contempt. Members of that gender are not permitted 
positions of formal power, and may be restricted in 
their movements and activities. Some worlds may 
go so far as to scorn both traditional genders, using 
gengineering techniques to hybridize or alter con -
ventional human biology.
E Cultural fundamentalist, Cultural missionary to 
outworlders, Local rebel driven to pointless and 
meaningless violence
F Oppressed native, Research scientist, Offworld 
emancipationist, Local reformer
C The oppressed gender is restive against the cus-
toms, The oppressed gender largely supports the 
customs, The customs relate to some physical 
quality of the world, The oppressed gender has 
had maltech gengineering done to “tame” them.
T Aerosol reversion formula for undoing gengi -
neered docility, Hidden history of the world, 
Pretech gengineering equipment
P Shrine to the virtues of the favored gender, 
Security center for controlling the oppressed, 
Gengineering lab
Night World
The world is plunged into eternal darkness. The 
only life on this planet derives its energy from other 
sources, such as geothermal heat, extremely volatile 
chemical reactions in the planet’s soil, or light in a 
non-visible spectrum. Most flora and fauna is vora -
ciously eager to consume other life.
E Monstrous thing from the night, Offworlder 
finding the obscurity of the world convenient 
for dark purposes, Mad scientist experimenting 
with local life
F Curious offworlder researcher, Hard-pressed 
colony leader, High priest of a sect that finds 
religious significance in the night
C Daylight comes as a cataclysmic event at very 
long intervals, Light causes very dangerous reac-
tions in native life or chemicals here, The locals 
have been gengineered to exist without sight
T Rare chemicals created in the darkness, Light 
source usable on this world, Smuggler cache 
hidden here in ages past
P Formlessly pitch-black wilderness, Sea without 
a sun, Location defined by sounds or smells
Minimal Contact
The locals refuse most contact with offworlders. 
Only a small, quarantined treaty port is provided for 
offworld trade, and ships can expect an exhaustive 
search for contraband. Local governments may be 
trying to keep the very existence of interstellar trade 
a secret from their populations, or they may simply 
consider offworlders too dangerous or repugnant to 
be allowed among the population.
E Customs official, Xenophobic natives, Existing 
merchant who doesn’t like competition
F Aspiring tourist, Anthropological researcher, 
Offworld thief, Religious missionary
C The locals carry a disease harmless to them and 
lethal to outsiders, The locals hide dark purpos-
es from offworlders, The locals have something 
desperately needed but won’t bring it into the 
treaty port
T Contraband trade goods, Security perimeter 
codes, Black market local products
P Treaty port bar, Black market zone, Secret 
smuggler landing site
===== PAGE 151 =====
World tagS •147 
Nomads
Most of the natives of this world are nomadic, usually 
following a traditional cycle of movement through 
the lands they possess. Promises of rich plunder or 
local environmental perils can force these groups to 
strike out against neighbors. Other groups are forced 
to move constantly due to unpredictable dangers that 
crop up on the planet.
E Desperate tribal leader who needs what the PCs 
have, Ruthless raider chieftain, Leader seeking 
to weld the nomads into an army
F Free-spirited young nomad, Dreamer imagining 
a stable life, Offworlder enamored of the life
C An irresistibly lethal swarm of native life forces 
locals to move regularly, Ancient defense sys -
tems destroy too-long-stationary communities, 
Local chemical patches require careful balancing 
of exposure times to avoid side effects
T Cache of rare and precious resource, Plunder 
seized by a tribal raid, Tech that makes a place 
safe for long-term inhabitation
P Temporary nomad camp, Oasis or resource re-
serve, Trackless waste that kills the unprepared
Oceanic World
The world is entirely or almost entirely covered with 
liquid water. Habitations might be floating cities, or 
might cling precariously to the few rocky atolls jut-
ting up from the waves, or are planted as bubbles on 
promontories deep beneath the stormy surface. Sur-
vival depends on aquaculture. Planets with inedible 
alien life rely on gengineered Terran sea crops.
E
Pirate raider, Violent “salvager” gang, Tentacled 
sea monster
F Daredevil fisherman, Sea hermit, Sapient native 
life
C The liquid flux confuses grav engines too badly 
for them to function on this world, Sea is cor -
rosive or toxic, The seas are wracked by regular 
storms
T Buried pirate treasure, Location of enormous 
schools of fish, Pretech water purification equip-
ment
P The only island on the planet, Floating space -
port, Deck of a storm-swept ship, Undersea 
bubble city
===== PAGE 152 =====
148• World tagS
Out of Contact
The natives have been entirely out of contact with 
the greater galaxy for centuries or longer. Perhaps 
the original colonists were seeking to hide from the 
rest of the universe, or the Silence destroyed any 
means of communication. It may have been so long 
that human origins on other worlds have regressed 
into a topic for legends. The players might be on the 
first offworld ship to land since the First Wave of 
colonization a thousand years ago.
E Fearful local ruler, Zealous native cleric, Sinister 
power that has kept the world isolated
F Scheming native noble, Heretical theologian, 
UFO cultist native
C Automatic defenses fire on ships that try to take 
off, The natives want to stay out of contact, The 
natives are highly vulnerable to offworld diseas-
es, The native language is completely unlike any 
known to the group
T Ancient pretech equipment, Terran relic brought 
from Earth, Logs of the original colonists
P Long-lost colonial landing site, Court of the lo-
cal ruler, Ancient defense battery controls
Outpost World
The world is only a tiny outpost of human habitation 
planted by an offworld corporation or government. 
Perhaps the staff is there to serve as a refueling and 
repair stop for passing ships, or to oversee an au -
tomated mining and refinery complex. They might 
be there to study ancient ruins, or simply serve as 
a listening and monitoring post for traffic through 
the system. The outpost is likely well-equipped with 
defenses against casual piracy.
E Space-mad outpost staffer, Outpost commander 
who wants it to stay undiscovered, Undercover 
saboteur
F Lonely staffer, Fixated researcher, Overtaxed 
maintenance chief
C The alien ruin defense systems are waking up, 
Atmospheric disturbances trap the group inside 
the outpost for a month, Pirates raid the outpost, 
The crew have become converts to a strange set 
of beliefs
T Alien relics, Vital scientific data, Secret corpo -
rate exploitation plans
P Grimy recreation room, Refueling station, The 
only building on the planet, A “starport” of 
swept bare rock.
Perimeter Agency
Before the Silence, the Perimeter was a Terran-spon-
sored organization charged with rooting out use of 
maltech, technology banned in human space as too 
dangerous for use or experimentation. Unbraked 
AIs, gengineered slave species, nanotech replicators, 
weapons of planetary destruction… the Perimeter 
hunted down experimenters with a great indiffer -
ence to planetary laws. Most Perimeter Agencies 
collapsed during the Silence, but a few managed to 
hold on to their mission, though modern Perimeter 
agents often find more work as conventional spies.
E Renegade Agency Director, Maltech researcher, 
Paranoid intelligence chief
F Agent in need of help, Support staffer, “Unjustly” 
targeted researcher
C The local Agency has gone rogue and now uses 
maltech, The Agency archives have been com -
promised, The Agency has been targeted by a 
maltech-using organization, The Agency’s ex -
istence is unknown to the locals
T Agency maltech research archives, Agency pre-
tech spec-ops gear, File of blackmail on local 
politicians
P Interrogation room, Smoky bar, Maltech labo -
ratory, Secret Agency base
Pilgrimage Site
The world is noted for an important spiritual or his-
torical location, and might be the sector headquar -
ters for a widespread religion or political movement. 
The site attracts wealthy pilgrims from throughout 
nearby space, and those with the money necessary to 
manage interstellar travel can be quite generous to 
the site and its keepers. The locals tend to be fiercely 
protective of the place and its reputation, and some 
places may forbid the entrance of those not suitably 
pious or devout.
E Saboteur devoted to a rival belief, Bitter reform-
er who resents the current leadership, Swindler 
conning the pilgrims
F Protector of the holy site, Naive offworlder pil-
grim, Outsider wanting to learn the sanctum’s 
inner secrets
C
The site is actually a fake, The site is run by 
corrupt and venal keepers, A natural disaster 
threatens the site
T Ancient relic guarded at the site, Proof of the 
site’s inauthenticity, Precious offering from a 
pilgrim
P Incense-scented sanctum, Teeming crowd of 
pilgrims, Imposing holy structure
===== PAGE 153 =====
World tagS •149 
Pleasure World
This world provides delights either rare or impermis-
sible elsewhere. Matchless local beauty, stunningly 
gengineered natives, a wide variety of local drugs, 
carnal pleasures unacceptable on other worlds, or 
some other rare delight is readily available here. Most 
worlds are fully aware of the value of their offerings, 
and the prices they demand can be in credits or in less 
tangible recompense.
E Purveyor of evil delights, Local seeking to con-
trol others with addictions, Offworlder exploiter 
of native resources
F Tourist who’s in too deep, Native seeking a more 
meaningful life elsewhere, Offworld entertainer 
looking for training here
C A deeply repugnant pleasure is offered here by a 
culture that sees nothing wrong with it, Certain 
pleasures here are dangerously addictive, The 
prices here can involve enslavement or death, 
The world has been seized and exploited by an 
imperial power
T Forbidden drug, A contract for some unspeak -
able payment, Powerful tech repurposed for 
hedonistic ends
P Breathtaking natural feature, Artful but deca -
dent salon, Grimy den of desperate vice
Police State
The world is a totalitarian police state. Any sign of 
disloyalty to the planet’s rulers is punished severely, 
and suspicion riddles society. Some worlds might op-
erate by Soviet-style informers and indoctrination, 
while more technically sophisticated worlds might 
rely on omnipresent cameras or braked AI “guardian 
angels”. Outworlders are apt to be treated as a nec -
essary evil at best, and “disappeared” if they become 
troublesome.
E Secret police chief, Scapegoating official, 
Treacherous native informer
F Rebel leader, Offworld agitator, Imprisoned vic-
tim, Crime boss
C The natives largely believe in the righteousness 
of the state, The police state is automated and 
its “rulers” can’t shut it off, The leaders foment 
a pogrom against “offworlder spies”.
T List of police informers, Wealth taken from “en-
emies of the state”, Dear Leader’s private stash
P Military parade, Gulag, Gray concrete housing 
block, Surveillance center
Post-Scarcity
The locals have maintained sufficient Mandate-era 
tech to be effectively post-scarcity in their economic 
structure. Everyone has all the necessities and most 
of the desires they can imagine. Conflict now exists 
over the apportionment of services and terrestrial 
space, since anything else can be had in abundance. 
Military goods and items of mass destruction may 
still be restricted, and there is probably some reason 
that the locals do not export their vast wealth.
E Frenzied ideologue fighting over an idea, Par -
anoid local fearing offworlder influence, Grim 
reformer seeking the destruction of the “enfee-
bling” productive tech
F Offworlder seeking something available only 
here, Local struggling to maintain the produc -
tion tech, Native missionary seeking to bring 
abundance to other worlds
C The tech causes serious side-effects on those 
who take advantage of it, The tech is breaking 
down, The population is growing too large, The 
tech produces only certain things in abundance
T A cornucopia device, A rare commodity that 
cannot be duplicated, Contract for services
P Tiny but richly-appointed private quarters, Mar-
ket for services, Hushed non-duped art salon
Preceptor Archive
The Preceptors of the Great Archive were a pre-Si-
lence organization devoted to ensuring the dissem -
ination of human culture, history, and basic tech -
nology to frontier worlds that risked losing this 
information during the human expansion. Most 
frontier planets had an Archive where natives could 
learn useful technical skills in addition to human his-
tory and art. Those Archives that managed to survive 
the Silence now strive to send their missionaries of 
knowledge to new worlds in need of their lore.
E Luddite native, Offworld merchant who wants 
the natives kept ignorant, Religious zealot, Cor-
rupted First Speaker who wants to keep a mo-
nopoly on learning
F Preceptor Adept missionary, Offworld scholar, 
Reluctant student, Roving Preceptor Adept
C The local Archive has taken a very religious and 
mystical attitude toward their teaching, The Ar-
chive has maintained some replicable pretech 
science, The Archive has been corrupted and 
their teaching is incorrect
T Lost Archive database, Ancient pretech teaching 
equipment, Hidden cache of unacceptable tech
P Archive lecture hall, Experimental laboratory, 
Student-local riot
===== PAGE 154 =====
150• World tagS
Pretech Cultists
The capacities of human science before the Silence 
vastly outmatch the technology available since the 
Scream. The Jump Gates alone were capable of cross-
ing hundreds of light years in a moment, and they 
were just one example of the results won by blending 
psychic artifice with pretech science. Some worlds 
outright worship the artifacts of their ancestors, see-
ing in them the work of more enlightened and perfect 
humanity. These cultists may or may not understand 
the operation or replication of these devices, but they 
seek and guard them jealously.
E Cult leader, Artifact supplier, Pretech smuggler
F Offworld scientist, Robbed collector, Cult her -
etic
C The cultists can actually replicate certain forms 
of pretech, The cultists abhor use of the devices 
as “presumption on the holy”, The cultists mis -
take the party’s belongings for pretech
T Pretech artifacts both functional and broken, 
Religious-jargon laced pretech replication tech-
niques, Waylaid payment for pretech artifacts
P Shrine to nonfunctional pretech, Smuggler’s den, 
Public procession showing a prized artifact
Primitive Aliens
The world is populated by a large number of sapient 
aliens that have yet to develop advanced technology. 
The human colonists may have a friendly or hostile 
relationship with the aliens, but a certain intrinsic 
tension is likely. Small human colonies might have 
been enslaved or otherwise subjugated.
E Hostile alien chief, Human firebrand, Danger -
ous local predator, Alien religious zealot
F Colonist leader, Peace-faction alien chief, Plan -
etary frontiersman, Xenoresearcher
C The alien numbers are huge and can overwhelm 
the humans whenever they so choose, One 
group is trying to use the other to kill their polit-
ical opponents, The aliens are incomprehensibly 
strange, One side commits an atrocity
T Alien religious icon, Ancient alien-human treaty, 
Alien technology
P Alien village, Fortified human settlement, Mas -
sacre site
Prison Planet
This planet is or was intended as a prison. Some such 
prisons were meant for specific malefactors of the 
Terran Mandate, while others were to contain en -
tire “dangerous” ethnic groups or alien races. Some 
may still have warden AIs or automatic systems to 
prevent any unauthorized person from leaving, and 
any authorization permits have long since expired.
E Crazed warden AI, Brutal heir to gang leader-
ship, Offworlder who’s somehow acquired war-
den powers and exploits the locals
F Innocent local born here, Native technician 
forced to maintain the very tech that imprisons 
them, Offworlder trapped here by accident
C Departure permits are a precious currency, The 
prison industry still makes valuable pretech de-
vices, Gangs have metamorphosed into govern-
ments, The local nobility descended from the 
prison staff
T A pass to get offworld, A key to bypass ancient 
security devices, Contraband forbidden by the 
security scanners
P Mandate-era prison block converted to gov -
ernment building, Industrial facility manned 
by mandatory numbers of prisoners, Makeshift 
shop where contraband is assembled
Psionics Academy
This world is one of the few that have managed to 
redevelop the basics of psychic training. Without 
this education, a potential psychic is doomed to ei -
ther madness or death unless they refrain from using 
their abilities. Psionic academies are rare enough that 
offworlders are often sent there to study by wealthy 
patrons. The secrets of psychic mentorship, the 
protocols and techniques that allow a psychic to 
successfully train another, are carefully guarded at 
these academies. Most are closely affiliated with the 
planetary government.
E
Corrupt psychic instructor, Renegade student, 
Mad psychic researcher, Resentful townie
F Offworld researcher, Aspiring student, Wealthy 
tourist
C The academy curriculum kills a significant per-
centage of students, The faculty use students as 
research subjects, The students are indoctrinat -
ed as sleeper agents, The local natives hate the 
academy, The academy is part of a religion.
T Secretly developed psitech, A runaway psychic 
mentor, Psychic research prize
P Training grounds, Experimental laboratory, 
School library, Campus hangout
===== PAGE 155 =====
World tagS •151 
Psionics Fear
The locals are terrified of psychics. Perhaps their 
history is studded with feral psychics who went on 
murderous rampages, or perhaps they simply nurse 
an unreasoning terror of those “mutant freaks”. Psy-
chics demonstrate their powers at risk of their lives.
E Mental purity investigator, Suspicious zealot, 
Witch-finder
F Hidden psychic, Offworlder psychic trapped 
here, Offworld educator
C Psychic potential is much more common here, 
Some tech is mistaken as psitech, Natives believe 
certain rituals and customs can protect them 
from psychic powers
T Hidden psitech cache, Possessions of convicted 
psychics, Reward for turning in a psychic
P Inquisitorial chamber, Lynching site, Museum 
of psychic atrocities
Psionics Worship
These natives view psionic powers as a visible gift of 
god or sign of superiority. If the world has a function-
al psychic training academy, psychics occupy almost 
all major positions of power and are considered the 
natural and proper rulers of the world. If the world 
lacks training facilities, it is likely a hodgepodge of 
demented cults, with each one dedicated to a margin-
ally-coherent feral prophet and their psychopathic 
ravings.
E Psychic inquisitor, Haughty mind-noble, Psy -
chic slaver, Feral prophet
F Offworlder psychic researcher, Native rebel, 
Offworld employer seeking psychics
C The psychic training is imperfect, and the psy -
chics all show significant mental illness, The 
psychics have developed a unique discipline, 
The will of a psychic is law, Psychics in the party 
are forcibly kidnapped for “enlightening”.
T Ancient psitech, Valuable psychic research re -
cords, Permission for psychic training
P Psitech-imbued council chamber, Temple to the 
mind, Sanitarium-prison for feral psychics
Quarantined World
The world is under a quarantine, and space travel 
to and from it is strictly forbidden. This may be en-
forced by massive ground batteries that burn any 
interlopers from the planet’s sky, or it may be that a 
neighboring world runs a persistent blockade.
E Defense installation commander, Suspicious pa-
trol leader, Crazed asteroid hermit
F Relative of a person trapped on the world, Hu-
manitarian relief official, Treasure hunter
C The natives want to remain isolated, The quar-
antine is enforced by an ancient alien installa -
tion, The world is rife with maltech abomina -
tions, The blockade is meant to starve everyone 
on the barren world.
T Defense grid key, Bribe for getting someone out, 
Abandoned alien tech
P Bridge of a blockading ship, Defense installation 
control room, Refugee camp
Radioactive World
Whether due to a legacy of atomic warfare unhin -
dered by nuke snuffers or a simple profusion of 
radioactive elements, this world glows in the dark. 
Even heavy vacc suits can filter only so much of the 
radiation, and most natives suffer a wide variety of 
cancers, mutations and other illnesses without the 
protection of advanced medical treatments.
E Bitter mutant, Relic warlord, Desperate would-
be escapee
F Reckless prospector, Offworld scavenger, Bio -
genetic variety seeker
C The radioactivity is steadily growing worse, The 
planet’s medical resources break down, The 
radioactivity has inexplicable effects on living 
creatures, The radioactivity is the product of a 
malfunctioning pretech manufactory.
T Ancient atomic weaponry, Pretech anti-radioac-
tivity drugs, Untainted water supply
P Mutant-infested ruins, Scorched glass plain, 
Wilderness of bizarre native life, Glowing bar -
rens
===== PAGE 156 =====
152• World tagS
Refugees
The world teems with refugees, either exiles from an-
other planet who managed to get here, or the human 
detritus of some local conflict that have fled to the 
remaining stable states. The natives usually regard 
the refugees with hostility, an attitude returned by 
many among their unwilling guests.
E Xenophobic native leader, Refugee chief aspir-
ing to seize the host nation, Politician seeking to 
use the refugees as a weapon
F Sympathetic refugee waif, Local hard-pressed by 
refugee gangs, Clergy seeking peace
C The xenophobes are right that the refugees are 
taking over, The refugees are right that the xe-
nophobes want them out or dead, Both are right, 
Outside powers are using the refugees to desta-
bilize an enemy government, Refugee and local 
cultures are extremely incompatible
T Treasures brought out by fleeing refugees, Cit -
izenship papers, Cache of vital refugee supplies, 
Hidden arms for terrorists
P Hopeless refugee camp, City swarming with 
confused strangers, Festival full of angry locals
Regional Hegemon
This world has the technological sophistication, nat-
ural resources, and determined polity necessary to be 
a regional hegemon for the sector. Nearby worlds are 
likely either directly subservient to it or tack carefully 
to avoid its anger. It may even be the capital of a small 
stellar empire.
E Ambitious general, Colonial official, Contemp -
tuous noble
F Diplomat, Offworld ambassador, Foreign spy
C The hegemon’s influence is all that’s keeping a 
murderous war from breaking out on nearby 
worlds, The hegemon is decaying and losing its 
control, The government is riddled with spies, 
The hegemon is genuinely benign
T Diplomatic carte blanche, Deed to an offworld 
estate, Foreign aid grant
P Palace or seat of government, Salon teeming 
with spies, Protest rally, Military base
Restrictive Laws
A myriad of laws, customs, and rules constrain the 
inhabitants of this world, and even acts that are com-
pletely permissible elsewhere are punished severely 
here. The locals may provide lists of these laws to 
offworlders, but few non-natives can hope to master 
all the important intricacies.
E Law enforcement officer, Outraged native, Na-
tive lawyer specializing in peeling offworlders, 
Paid snitch
F Frustrated offworlder, Repressed native, Re -
forming crusader
C The laws change regularly in patterns only na -
tives understand, The laws forbid some action 
vital to the party, The laws forbid the simple 
existence of some party members, The laws are 
secret to offworlders
T Complete legal codex, Writ of diplomatic im -
munity, Fine collection vault contents
P Courtroom, Mob scene of outraged locals, Leg -
islative chamber, Police station
Revanchists
The locals formerly owned another world, or a ma-
jor nation on the planet formerly owned an addi -
tional region of land. Something happened to take 
away this control or drive out the former rulers, and 
they’ve never forgotten it. The locals are obsessed 
with reclaiming their lost lands, and will allow no 
questions of practicality to interfere with their cause.
E Demagogue whipping the locals on to a hope -
less war, Politician seeking to use the resentment 
for their own ends, Local convinced the PCs are 
agents of the “thieving” power, Refugee from 
the land bitterly demanding it be reclaimed
F Realist local clergy seeking peace, Politician 
trying to calm the public, Third-party diplomat 
trying to stamp out the fire
C The revanchists’ claim is completely just and rea-
sonable, The land is now occupied entirely by 
heirs of the conquerors, Both sides have seized 
lands the other thinks are theirs
T Stock of vital resource produced by the taken 
land, Relic carried out of it, Proof that the land 
claim is justified or unjustified
P Memorial monument to the loss, Cemetery of 
those who died in the conquest, Public ceremo-
ny commemorating the disaster
===== PAGE 157 =====
World tagS •153 
Revolutionaries
The world is convulsed by one or more bands of rev-
olutionaries, with some nations perhaps in the grip of 
a current revolution. Most of these upheavals can be 
expected only to change the general flavor of prob-
lems in the polity, but the process of getting there 
usually produces a tremendous amount of suffering.
E Blood-drenched revolutionary leader, Blood-
drenched secret police chief, Hostile foreign 
agent seeking further turmoil
F Sympathetic victim accused of revolutionary 
sympathies or government collaboration, Revo-
lutionary or state agent who now repents, Agent 
of a neutral power that wants peace
C The revolutionaries actually do seem likely to 
put in better rulers, The revolutionaries are 
client groups that got out of hand, The revolu-
tionaries are clearly much worse than the gov-
ernment, The revolutionaries have no real ideals 
beyond power and merely pretend to ideology
T List of secret revolutionary sympathizers, Proof 
of rebel hypocrisy, Confiscated wealth
P Festival that explodes into violence, Heavi -
ly-fortified police station, Revolutionary base 
hidden in the wilderness
Rigid Culture
The local culture is extremely rigid. Certain forms of 
behavior and belief are absolutely mandated, and any 
deviation from these principles is punished, or else 
society may be strongly stratified by birth with lim-
ited prospects for change. Anything which threatens 
the existing social order is feared and shunned.
E Rigid reactionary, Wary ruler, Regime ideo -
logue, Offended potentate
F Revolutionary agitator, Ambitious peasant, 
Frustrated merchant
C The cultural patterns are enforced by technolog-
ical aids, The culture is run by a secret cabal of 
manipulators, The culture has explicit religious 
sanction, The culture evolved due to important 
necessities that have since been forgotten
T Precious traditional regalia, Peasant tribute, Op-
ulent treasures of the ruling class
P Time-worn palace, Low-caste slums, Bandit den, 
Reformist temple
Rising Hegemon
This world is not yet a dominant power in the sec -
tor, but it’s well on its way there. Whether through 
newly-blossoming economic, military, or cultural 
power, they’re extending their influence over their 
neighbors and forging new arrangements between 
their government and the rulers of nearby worlds.
E Jingoistic supremacist, Official bent on glorious 
success, Foreign agent saboteur
F Friendly emissary to the benighted, Hardscrab-
ble local turned great success, Foreign visitor 
seeking contacts or knowledge
C They’re only strong because their neighbors 
have been weakened, Their success is based on 
a fluke resource or pretech find, They bitterly 
resent their neighbors as former oppressors
T Tribute shipment, Factory or barracks emblem-
atic of their power source, Tech or data that will 
deal a blow to their rise
P Rustic town being hurled into prosperity, Gov -
ernment building being expanded, Starport 
struggling under the flow of new ships
Ritual Combat
The locals favor some form of stylized combat to 
resolve disputes, provide entertainment, or settle 
religious differences. This combat is probably not 
normally lethal unless it’s reserved for a specific dis-
posable class of slaves or professionals. Some combat 
may involve mastery of esoteric weapons and com-
plex arenas, while other forms might require nothing 
more than a declaration in the street and a drawn gun.
E Bloodthirsty local champion, Ambitious glad -
iator stable owner, Xenophobic master fighter
F Peace-minded foreign missionary, Temperate 
defender of the weak, Local eager to learn of 
offworld fighting styles
C The required weapons are strange pretech arti -
facts, Certain classes are forbidden from fighting 
and require champions, Loss doesn’t mean death 
but it does mean ritual scarring or property loss
T Magnificent weapon, Secret book of martial 
techniques, Token signifying immunity to ritual 
combat challenges, Prize won in bloody battle 
P Area full of cheering spectators, Dusty street 
outside a saloon, Memorial for fallen warriors
===== PAGE 158 =====
154• World tagS
Robots
The world has a great many robots on it. Most bots 
are going to be non-sentient expert systems, though 
an AI with enough computing resources can con -
trol many bots at once, and some worlds may have 
developed VIs to a degree that individual bots can 
seem (or be) sentient. Some worlds might even be 
ruled by metal overlords, ones which do not need to 
be sentient so long as they have overwhelming force.
E Hostile robot master, Robot greedy to seize off-
world tech, Robot fallen in love with the PC’s 
ship, Oligarch whose factories build robots
F Data-seeking robot, Plucky young robot tech, 
Local being pushed out of a job by robots
C The robots are only partially controlled, The 
robots are salvaged and originally meant for 
a much darker use, The robots require a rare 
material that the locals fight over, The robots 
require the planet’s specific infrastructure so 
cannot be exported
T Prototype robot, Secret robot override codes, 
Vast cache of robot-made goods, Robot-destroy-
ing pretech weapon
P Humming robotic factory, Stark robotic “bar -
racks”, House crowded with robot servants and 
only one human owner
Seagoing Cities
Either the world is entirely water or else the land is 
simply too dangerous for most humans. Human set -
tlement on this world consists of a number of float-
ing cities that follow the currents and the fish. These 
city-ships might have been purpose-built for their 
task, or they could be jury-rigged conglomerations 
of ships and structures thrown together when the 
need for seagoing life become apparent to the locals.
E Pirate city lord, Mer-human raider chieftain, 
Hostile landsman noble, Enemy city saboteur
F City navigator, Scout captain, Curious mer-hu-
man, Hard-pressed ship-city engineer
C The seas are not water, The fish schools have 
vanished and the city faces starvation, Terrible 
storms drive the city into the glacial regions, 
Suicide ships ram the city’s hull
T Giant pearls with mysterious chemical proper -
ties, Buried treasure, Vital repair materials
P Bridge of the city, Storm-tossed sea, A bridge 
fashioned of many small boats.
===== PAGE 159 =====
World tagS •155 
Sealed Menace
Something on this planet has the potential to create 
enormous havoc for the inhabitants if it is not kept 
safely contained by its keepers. Whether a massive 
seismic fault line suppressed by pretech terraforming 
technology, a disease that has to be quarantined with-
in hours of discovery, or an ancient alien relic that 
requires regular upkeep in order to prevent planetary 
catastrophe, the menace is a constant shadow on the 
fearful populace.
E Hostile outsider bent on freeing the menace, 
Misguided fool who thinks he can use it, Reck -
less researcher who thinks he can fix it
F Keeper of the menace, Student of its nature, Vic-
tim of the menace
C The menace would bring great wealth along 
with destruction, The menace is intelligent, The 
natives don’t all believe in the menace
T A key to unlock the menace, A precious byprod-
uct of the menace, The secret of the menace’s 
true nature
P Guarded fortress containing the menace, Mon-
itoring station, Scene of a prior outbreak of the 
menace
Secret Masters
The world is actually run by a hidden cabal, acting 
through their catspaws in the visible government. 
For one reason or another, this group finds it im -
perative that they not be identified by outsiders, and 
in some cases even the planet’s own government may 
not realize that they’re actually being manipulated by 
hidden masters.
E An agent of the cabal, Government official who 
wants no questions asked, Willfully blinded local
F Paranoid conspiracy theorist, Machiavellian 
gamesman within the cabal, Interstellar inves -
tigator
C The secret masters have a benign reason 
for wanting secrecy, The cabal fights open -
ly amongst itself, The cabal is recruiting new 
members
T A dossier of secrets on a government official, A 
briefcase of unmarked credit notes, The identity 
of a cabal member
P Smoke-filled room, Shadowy alleyway, Secret 
underground bunker
Sectarians
The world is torn by violent disagreement between 
sectarians of a particular faith. Each views the other 
as a damnable heresy in need of extirpation. Local 
government may be able to keep open war from 
breaking out, but the poisonous hatred divides com-
munities. The nature of the faith may be religious, or 
it may be based on some secular ideology.
E Paranoid believer, Native convinced the party 
is working for the other side, Absolutist ruler
F Reformist clergy, Local peacekeeping official, 
Offworld missionary, Exhausted ruler
C The conflict has more than two sides, The sec -
tarians hate each other for multiple reasons, The 
sectarians must cooperate or else life on this 
world is imperiled, The sectarians hate outsiders 
more than they hate each other, The differences 
in sects are incomprehensible to an outsider
T Ancient holy book, Incontrovertible proof, Of -
fering to a local holy man
P Sectarian battlefield, Crusading temple, Philos -
opher’s salon, Bitterly divided village
Seismic Instability
The local land masses are remarkably unstable, and 
regular earthquakes rack the surface. Local construc-
tion is either advanced enough to sway and move 
with the vibrations or primitive enough that it is 
easily rebuilt. Severe volcanic activity may be part 
of the instability.
E Earthquake cultist, Hermit seismologist, Bur -
rowing native life form, Earthquake-inducing 
saboteur
F Experimental construction firm owner, Adven-
turous volcanologist, Geothermal prospector
C The earthquakes are caused by malfunctioning 
pretech terraformers, They’re caused by alien 
technology, They’re restrained by alien tech -
nology that is being plundered by offworlders, 
The earthquakes are used to generate enormous 
amounts of energy.
T Earthquake generator, Earthquake suppressor, 
Mineral formed at the core of the world, Earth-
quake-proof building schematics
P Volcanic caldera, Village during an earthquake, 
Mud slide, Earthquake opening superheated 
steam fissures
===== PAGE 160 =====
156• World tagS
Shackled World
This world is being systematically contained by an 
outside power. Some ancient autonomous defense 
grid, robot law enforcement, alien artifact, or other 
force is preventing the locals from developing certain 
technology, or using certain devices, or perhaps from 
developing interstellar flight. This limit may or may 
not apply to offworlders; in the former case, the PCs 
may have to figure out a way to beat the shackles 
simply to escape the world.
E Passionless jailer-AI, Paranoid military grid AI, 
Robot overlord, Enigmatic alien master
F Struggling local researcher, Offworlder trapped 
here, Scientist with a plan to break the chains
C The shackles come off for certain brief windows 
of time, The locals think the shackles are im -
posed by God, An outside power greatly profits 
from the shackles, The rulers are exempt from 
the shackles
T Keycode to bypass the shackle, Tech shielded 
from the shackle, Exportable version of the 
shackle that can affect other worlds
P Grim high-tech control center, Factory full of 
workaround tech, Temple to the power or entity 
that imposed the shackle
Societal Despair
The world’s dominant society has lost faith in itself. 
Whether through some all-consuming war, great 
catastrophe, overwhelming outside culture, or reli -
gious collapse, the natives no longer believe in their 
old values, and search desperately for something new. 
Fierce conflict often exists between the last believers 
in the old dispensation and the nihilistic or searching 
disciples of the new age.
E Zealot who blames outsiders for the decay, Ni-
hilistic warlord, Offworlder looking to exploit 
the local despair
F Struggling messenger of a new way, Valiant par-
agon of a fading tradition, Local going through 
the motions of serving a now-irrelevant role
C A massive war discredited all the old values, Out-
side powers are working to erode societal con-
fidence for their own benefit, A local power is 
profiting greatly from the despair, The old ways 
were meant to aid survival on this world and 
their passing is causing many new woes
T Relic that would inspire a renaissance, Art that 
would inspire new ideas, Priceless artifact of a 
now-scorned belief
P Empty temple, Crowded den of obliviating vice, 
Smoky hall full of frantic speakers
Sole Supplier
Some extremely important resource is exported from 
this world and this world alone. It’s unlikely that the 
substance is critical for building spike drives unless 
this world is also the first to begin interstellar flight, 
but it may be critical to other high-tech processes or 
devices. The locals make a large amount of money off 
this trade and control of it is of critical importance to 
the planet’s rulers, and potentially to outside powers.
E Resource oligarch, Ruthless smuggler, Re -
source-controlling warlord, Foreign agent seek-
ing to subvert local government
F Doughty resource miner, Researcher trying to 
synthesize the stuff, Small-scale resource pro -
ducer, Harried starport trade overseer
C The substance is slow poison to process, The 
substance is created by hostile alien natives, 
The substance is very easy to smuggle in usable 
amounts, Only the natives have the genes or 
tech to extract it effectively
T Cache of processed resource, Trade permit to 
buy a load of it, A shipment of nigh-undetect -
ably fake substance
P Bustling resource extraction site, Opulent palace 
built with resource money, Lazy town square 
where everyone lives on resource payments
Taboo Treasure
The natives here produce something that is both 
fabulously valuable and strictly forbidden elsewhere 
in the sector. It may be a lethally addictive drug, for-
bidden gengineering tech, vat-grown “perfect slaves”, 
or a useful substance that can only be made through 
excruciating human suffering. This treasure is free-
ly traded on the world, but bringing it elsewhere is 
usually an invitation to a long prison stay or worse.
E Maker of a vile commodity, Smuggler for a pow-
erful offworlder, Depraved offworlder here for 
“fun”, Local warlord who controls the treasure
F Reformer seeking to end its use, Innovator try-
ing to repurpose the treasure in innocent ways, 
Wretched addict unwillingly prey to the treasure
C The treasure is extremely hard to smuggle, Its 
use visibly marks a user, The natives consider it 
for their personal use only, 
T Load of the forbidden good, Smuggling tech that 
could hide the good perfectly, Blackmail data on 
offworld buyers of the good
P Den where the good is used, Market selling the 
good to locals and a few outsiders, Factory or 
processing area where the good is created
===== PAGE 161 =====
World tagS •157 
Terraform Failure
This world was marginal for human habitation when 
it was discovered, but the Mandate or the early gov-
ernment put in pretech terraforming engines to cor-
rect its more extreme qualities. The terraforming did 
not entirely work, either failing of its own or suffer-
ing the destruction of the engines during the Silence. 
The natives are only partly adapted to the world’s 
current state, and struggle with the environment.
E Brutal ruler who cares only for their people, 
Offworlder trying to loot the damaged engines, 
Warlord trying to seize limited habitable land
F Local trying to fix the engines, Offworlder stu -
dent of the engines, World-wise native survivor
C The engines produced too much of something 
instead of too little, The engines were hijacked 
by aliens with different preferences, It was dis-
covered that an Earth-like environment would 
eventually cause a catastrophic disaster
T Parts to repair or restore the engines, Lootable 
pretech fragments, Valuable local tech devised 
to cope with the world
P
Zone of tolerable gravity or temperature, Native 
settlement built to cope with the environment, 
Massive ruined terraforming engine
Theocracy
The planet is ruled by the priesthood of the predom-
inant religion or ideology. The rest of the locals may 
or may not be terribly pious, but the clergy have the 
necessary military strength, popular support or con-
trol of resources to maintain their rule. Alternative 
faiths or incompatible ideologies are likely to be both 
illegal and socially unacceptable.
E Decadent priest-ruler, Zealous inquisitor, Re -
lentless proselytizer, True Believer
F Heretic, Offworld theologian, Atheistic mer -
chant, Desperate commoner
C The theocracy actually works well, The theoc -
racy is decadent and hated by the common folk, 
The theocracy is divided into mutually hostile 
sects, The theocracy is led by aliens
T Precious holy text, Martyr’s bones, Secret church 
records, Ancient church treasures
P Glorious temple, Austere monastery, Academy 
for ideological indoctrination, Decadent plea -
sure-cathedral
Tomb World
Tomb worlds are planets that were once inhabited 
by humans before the Silence. The sudden collapse 
of the jump gate network and the inability to bring 
in the massive food supplies required by the planet 
resulted in starvation, warfare, and death. Most tomb 
worlds are naturally hostile to human habitation and 
could not raise sufficient crops to maintain life. The 
few hydroponic facilities were usually destroyed in 
the fighting, and all that is left now are ruins, bones, 
and silence.
E Demented survivor tribe chieftain, Avaricious 
scavenger, Automated defense system, Native 
predator
F Scavenger Fleet captain, Archaeologist, Salvag -
ing historian, Xenophilic native survivor
C The ruins are full of booby-traps left by the final 
inhabitants, The world’s atmosphere quickly de-
grades anything in an opened building, A hand-
ful of desperate natives survived the Silence, The 
structures are unstable and collapsing
T Lost pretech equipment, Tech caches, Stores of 
unused munitions, Ancient historical data
P Crumbling hive-city, City square carpeted in 
bones, Ruined hydroponic facility, Cannibal 
tribe’s lair, Dead orbital jump gate
Trade Hub
This world is a major crossroads for local interstellar 
trade. It is well-positioned at the nexus of several 
short-drill trade routes, and has facilities for easy 
transfer of valuable cargoes and the fueling and re -
pairing of starships. The natives are accustomed to 
outsiders, and a polyglot mass of people from every 
nearby world can be found trading here.
E Cheating merchant, Thieving dockworker, 
Commercial spy, Corrupt customs official
F Rich tourist, Hardscrabble free trader, Merchant 
prince in need of catspaws, Friendly spaceport 
urchin
C An outworlder faction schemes to seize the trade 
hub, Saboteurs seek to blow up a rival’s ware -
houses, Enemies are blockading the trade routes, 
Pirates lace the hub with spies
T Voucher for a warehouse’s contents, Insider 
trading information, Case of precious offworld 
pharmaceuticals, Box of legitimate tax stamps 
indicating customs dues have been paid.
P Raucous bazaar, Elegant restaurant, Spaceport 
teeming with activity, Foggy street lined with 
warehouses
===== PAGE 162 =====
158• World tagS
Tyranny
The local government is brutal and indifferent to the 
will of the people. Laws may or may not exist, but 
the only one that matters is the whim of the rulers 
on any given day. Their minions swagger through 
the streets while the common folk live in terror of 
their appetites. The only people who stay wealthy are 
friends and servants of the ruling class.
E Debauched autocrat, Sneering bully-boy, Soul-
less government official, Occupying army officer
F Conspiring rebel, Oppressed merchant, Desper-
ate peasant, Inspiring religious leader
C The tyrant rules with vastly superior technology, 
The tyrant is a figurehead for a cabal of powerful 
men and women, The people are resigned to 
their suffering, The tyrant is hostile to “meddle-
some outworlders”.
T Plundered wealth, Beautiful toys of the elite, Re-
galia of rulership
P Impoverished village, Protest rally massacre, 
Decadent palace, Religious hospital for the in -
digent
Unbraked AI
Artificial intelligences are costly and difficult to cre -
ate, requiring a careful sequence of “growth stages” 
in order to bring them to sentience before artificial 
limits on cognition speed and learning development 
are installed. These “brakes” prevent runaway cogni-
tion metastasis. This world has an “unbraked AI” on 
it, probably with a witting or unwitting corps of ser-
vants. Unbraked AIs are quite insane, but they learn 
and reason with a speed impossible for humans, and 
can demonstrate a truly distressing subtlety.
E AI Cultist, Maltech researcher, Government of-
ficial dependent on the AI
F Perimeter agent, AI researcher, Braked AI
C The AI’s presence is unknown to the locals, The 
locals depend on the AI for some vital service, 
The AI appears to be harmless, The AI has fixat-
ed on the group’s ship’s computer, The AI wants 
transport offworld
T The room-sized AI core itself, Maltech research 
files, Perfectly tabulated blackmail on govern -
ment officials, Pretech computer circuitry
P Municipal computing banks, Cult compound, 
Repair center, Ancient hardcopy library
Urbanized Surface
The world’s land area is covered with buildings that 
extend downward for multiple levels. Such worlds 
either have a population in the trillions, extremely 
little land area, or are largely-abandoned due to some 
past catastrophe. Agriculture and resource extraction 
are part of the urban complex, and there may be an 
advanced maintenance system that may not be en -
tirely under the control of present natives.
E Maintenance AI that hates outsiders, Tyrant of 
a habitation block, Deep-dwelling prophet who 
considers “the sky” a blasphemy to be quelled
F Local yearning for wild spaces, Grubby urchin 
of the underlevels, Harried engineer trying to 
maintain ancient works, Grizzled hab cop
C The urban blocks are needed to survive the en-
vironment, The blocks were part of an ancient 
device of world-spanning size, The blocks re -
quire constant maintenance to avoid dangerous 
types of decay
T Massively efficient power source, Map of the 
secret ways of a zone, Passkey into restricted 
hab block areas
P Giant hab block now devoid of inhabitants, 
Chemical-reeking underway, Seawater mine 
full of salt and massive flowing channels
Utopia
Natural and social conditions on this world have 
made it a paradise for its inhabitants, a genuine uto-
pia of happiness and fulfillment. This is normally 
the result of drastic human engineering, including 
brain-gelding, neurochemical control, personality 
curbs, or complete “humanity” redefinitions. Even so, 
the natives are extremely happy with their lot, and 
may wish to extend that joy to poor, sad outsiders.
E Compassionate neurotherapist, Proselytizing 
native missionary to outsiders, Brutal tyrant 
who rules through inexorable happiness
F Deranged malcontent, Bloody-handed guerrilla 
leader of a rebellion of madmen, Outsider trying 
to find a way to reverse the utopian changes
C The natives really are deeply and contentedly 
happy with their altered lot, The utopia pro -
duces something that attracts others, The utopia 
works on converting outsiders through persua-
sion and generosity, The utopia involves some 
sacrifice that’s horrifying to non-members
T Portable device that applies the utopian change, 
Plans for a device that would destroy the utopia, 
Goods created joyfully by the locals
P
Plaza full of altered humans, Social ritual site, 
Secret office where “normal” humans rule
===== PAGE 163 =====
World tagS •159 
Warlords
The world is plagued by warlords. Numerous pow-
erful men and women control private armies suf -
ficiently strong to cow whatever local government 
may exist. On the lands they claim, their word is law. 
Most spend their time oppressing their own subjects 
and murderously pillaging those of their neighbors. 
Most like to wrap themselves in the mantle of ide -
ology, religious fervor, or an ostensibly legitimate 
right to rule.
E Warlord, Avaricious lieutenant, Expensive as -
sassin, Aspiring minion
F Vengeful commoner, Government military of -
ficer, Humanitarian aid official, Village priest
C The warlords are willing to cooperate to fight 
mutual threats, The warlords favor specific re-
ligions or races over others, The warlords are 
using substantially more sophisticated tech than 
others, Some of the warlords are better rulers 
than the government
T Weapons cache, Buried plunder, A warlord’s 
personal battle harness, Captured merchant 
shipping
P Gory battlefield, Burnt-out village, Barbaric 
warlord palace, Squalid refugee camp
Xenophiles
The natives of this world are fast friends with a par-
ticular alien race. The aliens may have saved the plan-
et at some point in the past, or awed the locals with 
superior tech or impressive cultural qualities. The 
aliens might even be the ruling class on the planet.
E Offworld xenophobe, Suspicious alien leader, 
Xenocultural imperialist
F Benevolent alien, Native malcontent, Gone-na -
tive offworlder
C The enthusiasm is due to alien psionics or tech, 
The enthusiasm is based on a lie, The aliens 
strongly dislike their “groupies”, The aliens feel 
obliged to rule humanity for its own good, Hu-
mans badly misunderstand the aliens
T Hybrid alien-human tech, Exotic alien crafts, 
Sophisticated xenolinguistic and xenocultural 
research data
P Alien district, Alien-influenced human home, 
Cultural festival celebrating alien artist
Xenophobes
The natives are intensely averse to dealings with out-
worlders. Whether through cultural revulsion, fear 
of tech contamination, or a genuine immunodefi -
ciency, the locals shun foreigners from offworld and 
refuse to have anything to do with them beyond the 
bare necessities of contact. Trade may or may not 
exist on this world, but if it does, it is almost certainly 
conducted by a caste of untouchables and outcasts.
E Revulsed local ruler, Native convinced some 
wrong was done to him, Cynical demagogue
F Curious native, Exiled former ruler, Local des -
perately seeking outworlder help
C The natives are symptomless carriers of a con -
tagious and dangerous disease, The natives are 
exceptionally vulnerable to offworld diseases, 
The natives require elaborate purification ritu -
als after speaking to an offworlder or touching 
them, The local ruler has forbidden any mercan-
tile dealings with outworlders
T Jealously-guarded precious relic, Local product 
under export ban, Esoteric local technology
P Sealed treaty port, Public ritual not open to out-
siders, Outcaste slum home
Zombies
This menace may not take the form of shambling 
corpses, but some disease, alien artifact, or crazed 
local practice produces men and women with hab -
its similar to those of murderous cannibal undead. 
These outbreaks may be regular elements in local so-
ciety, either provoked by some malevolent creators 
or the consequence of some local condition.
E
Soulless maltech biotechnology cult, Sinister 
governmental agent, Crazed zombie cultist
F Survivor of an outbreak, Doctor searching for a 
cure, Rebel against the secret malefactors
C The zombies retain human intelligence, The 
zombies can be cured, The process is voluntary 
among devotees, The condition is infectious
T Cure for the condition, Alien artifact that causes 
it, Details of the cult’s conversion process
P House with boarded-up windows, Dead city, 
Fortified bunker that was overrun from within
===== PAGE 164 =====
160• atmoSPhere
aTmosPhere
The first step in randomized world generation is deter-
mining the planet’s atmosphere. In some cases, this is 
going to be preordained; if you want a barren asteroid 
base, it’s not going to have any atmosphere at all. If you 
want a world teeming with human life, on the other 
hand, it almost certainly is going to have a breathable 
atmosphere.
Note that if a truly noxious atmosphere, climate, 
or biosphere turns up on a random roll, you should 
think carefully about what has made humans choose 
to live on such a world. Perhaps the original colonists 
were prisoners exiled to an open-world prison. It could 
be their ancestors sought isolation at all costs. Given its 
position in the sector, it might be a vital refueling and 
trading port for multiple short-run spike drive cours -
es. The original colonists might have had to make an 
emergency landing. Whatever the reason, it takes a 
powerful motivation to make a band of colonists de -
cide to make a corrosive, burning hellhole of a planet 
their permanent home.
Types of Atmospheres
Corrosive atmospheres are dangerously hostile to con -
ventional vacc suits and other protective gear. They 
steadily strip away at a suit’s vent ports, wiring connec-
tions, and other weak spots until they eventually break 
through and flood the suit with a toxic cocktail that 
usually kills a victim in seconds. Weak atmospheres 
might require as much as a day to degrade a vacc suit, 
while strong ones might accomplish the job in an hour. 
Even forcefield-based environment suits such as a FEP 
suffer steady damage to their exposed elements.
Native vacc suits are usually covered with an 
ablative layer or spray that can be regularly renewed, 
and their buildings often rely on a steadily-extruded 
slurry of neutralizing materials that can be constantly 
renewed by pores in the building surface itself. This 
often gives the building a drippy, half-melted look that 
may be more than cosmetic in the case of those struc -
tures that have failing slurry pumps. Advanced tech 
level 5 equipment may be able to overcome the effects, 
but even pretech is often taxed by the relentless rigors 
of this world. Vehicles and shuttles are kept in pres -
surized garages when not in use, and starships never 
land for long.
Corrosive worlds have a number of intrinsic ad -
venture complications, the largest being the way that 
every activity outside of a hab building comes with a 
built-in time limit. Whatever the party chooses to do 
outside of a building, it has to accomplish before their 
suit seals fail or the atmosphere corrodes a hole in their 
vehicle hull. A clever GM can use this problem to add 
extra tension to an otherwise simple task.
Inert gas atmospheres aren’t hostile or poisonous, 
but they’re unbreathable by humans. If the planet’s cli-
mate is otherwise tolerable, the natives might be able 
to live and work outdoors without anything more than 
an air tank and face mask. Some degree of technical 
sophistication is going to be necessary for humanity 
to survive, and large supplies of oxygen are going to 
have to be extracted from some local source. “Air mines” 
might exist to replace the oxygen lost during human 
use, or local power plants might need to be kept run-
ning full blast in order to crack water molecules into 
hydrogen and oxygen.
On worlds with an unbreathable atmosphere, con-
trol of the air supply makes it much harder for locals 
to rebel against their leaders. Without the equipment 
and power to generate their own air supplies, would-be 
rebels are entirely at the mercy of those who control 
the oxygen. Most rulers pick up on this fact rapidly, and 
some worlds with unbreathable atmospheres might 
even make it a crime to own illicit oxygen generation 
equipment.
Airless or thin atmospheres are appropriate to as -
teroids, rocky planetoids, or barren worlds that have 
had their atmospheres burnt off by weapons or cos -
mic caprice. Whatever atmosphere exists is too thin 
to support human life, if it exists at all, and the world 
is largely naked to the chill of space and the blaze of 
stellar heat. Exposure to the planet’s surface without a 
vacc suit or pressurized building is as lethal as exposure 
to hard vacuum.
Airless worlds are hostile to human life, but they 
excel at preserving the relics of the past. Provided that 
the ruins or remains are kept out of the baking heat of 
the local stellar body and the impact of random me -
teorites, they can survive for millions of years. Some 
exceptionally ancient alien ruins might even date back 
from before the world lost its atmosphere.
Breathable mix atmospheres can support human 
life without additional equipment or gengineered mod-
ification. Any world that has a human population in 
the millions or more almost certainly has a breathable 
mix atmosphere.
While the air is breathable, almost every world 
has its own subtle cocktail of inert gases, atmospher -
ic contaminants, and other odoriferous ingredients. 
For spacers accustomed to the filtered air supply of a 
2d6 Type
2 Corrosive, damaging to foreign objects
3 Inert gas, useless for respiration
4 Airless or thin to the point of suffocation
5-9 Breathable mix
10 Thick, but breathable with a pressure mask
11 Invasive, penetrating suit seals
12 Both corrosive and invasive in its effects
===== PAGE 165 =====
atmoSPhere •161 
starship, the “new world stink” of a fresh planetfall can 
be maddening, as few linger long enough to get used 
to the smell of the local air. Attempting to explain the 
source of this discomfort to the locals rarely results in 
positive results. Some spaceport bars make a point of 
their air filtration and composition mixers.
Thick atmospheres can usually be breathed with the 
aid of a filter mask, though the mix of contaminants 
renders it slowly or quickly toxic to humans who at -
tempt to breathe it straight. Separate air supplies are 
not necessary to supplement the blend, but any soci-
ety that means to survive on such a world must have 
sufficient technological expertise to manufacture and 
maintain large numbers of filter masks.
Thick atmospheres are often at least semi-opaque, 
and some worlds have thick atmospheres that are com-
pletely impenetrable to ordinary light. Deep banks of 
permanent fog might shroud the planet, or natives 
might have to go about with sophisticated ultraviolet 
or infrared viewing equipment if they don’t wish to be 
blind. Some banks of gases might be impenetrable to 
even these viewing tools, leaving a party vulnerable 
to moments of complete blindness while out on the 
surface of the world.
Invasive toxic atmospheres are composed of a 
substantial proportion of molecules small enough to 
infiltrate past the seals of most vacc suits. This infiltra-
tion doesn’t harm the suit, but the molecules have to 
be steadily flushed by the system’s purification sensors 
before they build up to a debilitating level. This caus -
es a much faster bleed of air as breathable oxygen is 
jettisoned along with the infiltrating molecules. Most 
invasive atmospheres cut oxygen supply durations by 
half, at best.
Invasive atmospheres make oxygen an even more 
important resource than it is on inert gas worlds. Out-
door work is avoided whenever possible, as any failure 
of a suit’s toxin sensors or flush system can lead to death 
before the wearer even realizes something is wrong. 
Steady exposure to low levels of the toxins can also 
result in unfortunate effects even with a fully-func -
tional suit. Hallucinations, chronic sickness, or worse 
can follow.
Corrosive and invasive atmospheres exist at the 
very border of what human society can tolerate. Com-
bining all the worst traits of an eroding, corrosive at-
mosphere and the invasive intrusion of toxic molecules, 
a planet cursed with an atmosphere like this is far more 
hostile than any mere airless rock.
Advanced pretech filtering and oxygen generation 
equipment might be able to maintain tolerable pressur-
ized habitats and hydroponic systems uncontaminated 
by exterior atmosphere. Anything less than this tech 
level means greater and greater amounts of societal 
resources devoted simply to the effort of breathing. 
Entire civilizations can be oriented around overcom -
ing the difficulties of maintaining their structures and 
their pressurized homes.
Whatever provoked the initial inhabitants to settle 
on this world must have been of overwhelming value 
or necessity to convince them to consign themselves 
and their children to such a place. It is highly unlikely 
that enough ship traffic exists to get any but the most 
fortunate locals offworld, so the rest are obliged to deal 
with their harsh existence as best they can.
===== PAGE 166 =====
162• temPerature
TemPeraTure
A world’s average temperature depends in large part 
upon its atmosphere. Worlds with an airless or thin 
atmosphere are directly exposed to the wild tempera-
ture variations produced by stellar radiation and the 
cold void of space, and might flip regularly between 
unendurable heat and near-absolute zero depending 
on planetary rotation and orbit.
If a GM intends this planet to have a large hu -
man population they should restrict the possibility of 
a frozen or burning world. Anything that is intolera -
ble to a human without a vacc suit means that major 
agriculture is unlikely. As it is effectively impossible to 
feed entire planets through limited interstellar trade, 
every planet needs to support its own population. A 
world that can’t grow food outside of hydroponic labs 
or underground farms is unlikely to support millions 
of people.
Types of Climates
Frozen worlds are those with so weak a stellar primary 
or so great a distance that the average temperature is 
close to absolute zero. Any atmosphere that once exist-
ed has long since frozen into drifts of solidified oxygen 
or lakes of liquid helium. Exposure to these drifts is 
very dangerous. Vacc suits maintain a tolerable tem -
perature easily because the stellar void is very empty, 
and there is little conduction of heat between the suit 
and empty space. Dunking a suit into a lake of thermal-
ly-conductive superchilled liquid can force the heating 
elements into sudden and drastic overload, draining a 
power cell in minutes or even seconds.
Cold worlds are uncomfortable, but a human can 
survive on them in nothing more than heavy clothing. 
The worst of the cold worlds are similar in condition 
to Earth’s Antarctic regions, barren wastes of ice and 
wind. The more clement ones have brief warmer sea-
sons or equatorial bands that get enough solar radiation 
to support substantial agriculture.
On cold worlds, agricultural land is at a premi -
um. The population is unlikely to be willing to limit its 
numbers to what hydroponic farms can provide, and 
they may lack the technology for wide-scale artificial 
production methods. Savage wars may have broken out 
over control of fertile growing regions, and popula -
tions have perhaps been driven away from the arable 
land into the cold zones and a lingering death.
Some worlds retain installations from before the 
Silence deep within the frozen wastes, ancient bases 
and laboratories that were planted in an age when 
good launch sites and orbital windows meant more 
than trifles of temperature. These lost sites might be 
remembered in legend and story, and some native lead-
ers might still be in possession of the automatic defense 
bypass codes handed down by their ancestors.
Temperate worlds were the most popular colony 
sites, and most of the truly populous worlds of the 
frontier have a temperate climate. Many temperate 
worlds have temperature ranges not unlike that of 
Earth, though most are canted a little further toward 
cold or heat depending on their angle and proximity 
to the local star.
Temperate worlds are the most likely to teem with 
native life as well, and to have alien ruins or remains 
located somewhere on their surface. Most frontier 
worlds never accumulated enough population to put a 
serious strain on a temperate world’s arable land, but 
this same capaciousness often allows for more com -
plicated social divisions to develop. Natives of other 
worlds are often forced to cooperate or die, while those 
of a clement temperate world have the luxury of deep 
and lasting divisions.
Warm worlds come in two main flavors, depend -
ing on the prevalence of water. “Desert worlds” are hot 
enough or arid enough to be deprived of most surface 
water. Any life on such a planet has to be capable of 
extracting water from living prey, air currents or mois-
ture supplies deep underground. Humans can survive 
on warm worlds without more than appropriate cloth-
ing, but desert-world humans must learn sophisticated 
techniques of water prospecting and well-drilling in 
order to maintain their agricultural systems. Warfare 
often revolves around these water systems.
The other common variety of warm world is one 
blessed with an abundance of surface water. These 
worlds tend to be covered with plant and animal life, 
teeming with thick jungles and vast mats of sargasso on 
seas that boil with piscids and other alien life analogs. 
These worlds can be quite prosperous for humans if the 
native life is edible, but inhabitants are often forced to 
deal with large predators and a vigorously ingenious 
native ecology of disease. 
Variable temperature worlds tend to show a greater 
distribution of climates than other worlds, either rang-
ing from cold to temperate levels or temperate to hot 
levels. This may be a climate that changes world-wide 
when a long, slow orbit brings the planet into prox -
imity with a stellar primary, or it might be a world 
that has substantially different climatic zones spread 
2d6 Type
2 Frozen, locked in perpetual ice
3 Cold, dominated by glaciers and tundra
4-5 Variable cold with temperate places
6-8 Temperate, Earthlike in its ranges
9-10 Variable warm, with temperate places
11 Warm, tropical and hotter in places
12 Burning, intolerably hot on its surface
===== PAGE 167 =====
temPerature •163 
across its surface. The north pole of one world might 
be a sun-blasted desert that moderates to a cool, wet 
equator, or an icy world might be warmed here and 
there by complex channels of geothermally-heated 
subsurface rivers. Variable temperature worlds tend 
to have savage weather. The mixing of hot and cold 
air can send ferocious cyclones and raging hurricanes 
across the surface of the world, some large enough to 
consume most of a hemisphere. 
Burning worlds are too hot for a human to survive 
without equipment similar to a vacc suit in effective -
ness. Rivulets of molten lead or copper might bleed 
from open veins on the hillsides, and many of the same 
perils that face an explorer on a frozen world have hot-
ter equivalents on a burning one. Ash drifts, pools of 
molten metal, and superheated liquid vents can bring 
quick death to an unwary explorer, and the miners who 
inhabit such worlds must be forever vigilant against the 
perils of their burning home.
Climate and Adventure
Any planet with Burning or Frozen conditions is go -
ing to need some kind of sealed habitat for humanity. 
Worlds of Cold or Warm temperatures are at least hab-
itable outside of their most extreme zones, though icy 
planets might not have much arable land on the outside.
As a consequence, planets with Frozen or Burning 
temperatures tend to have the climate as a backdrop 
rather than something the PCs regularly need to deal 
with. If they’ve landed on such a world’s spaceport, it’s 
probably sealed in some subterranean hangar-cavern 
or domed over by massive civil engineering. The ice 
or flame might be a constant concern of the locals, but 
the PCs aren’t going to have to cope with it unless they 
have to leave the inhabited regions of the planet.
On Burning worlds, this isn’t going to happen very 
often. Any habitat without active climate control is go-
ing to be melted or torched by local conditions in short 
order. There will be no ruins to explore or remnants to 
recover unless they’re somehow fireproof.
The easiest use of a Burning world’s temperature 
is as a threat to the locals or the PCs. If something isn’t 
fixed, or if something is destroyed, or if some place isn’t 
evacuated in time, then things will get intolerably hot. 
There’s usually a grace period of increasing tempera -
ture to help add urgency to the situation and layer on 
potential penalties or dangers as the PCs struggle to 
cope with the situation.
Frozen worlds can be equally lethal if a flood of 
liquid oxygen threatens to sweep through a habitat or 
a cold-brittled vital component breaks down. More 
significantly to PCs, however, frozen worlds tend to 
be much better about preserving ruins and remains. 
The PCs might be forced to deal with the frigid tem -
peratures as they search through an alien structure or 
the icy halls of a dead habitat. Such conditions can lead 
to strict time limits on an expedition before materials 
start to brittle and fail under the relentless chill.
===== PAGE 168 =====
164• bioSPhere
bIosPhere
Some worlds are highly unlikely to have a biosphere. 
An airless rock, a frozen wasteland, or a world of boil-
ing tin all are unlikely to host any sort of life more 
sophisticated than microbes, though the universe has 
demonstrated the existence of a few exotic creatures 
even on seemingly unendurable planets.
The real question of a biosphere is whether or not 
it’s edible. Colonists on a world without edible local life 
are forced to seed and grow Terran crops, which may 
well be outcompeted by native life specifically evolved 
for this world. Such colonists might well end up starv-
ing amid gardens of alien fruit, unable to digest any of 
it. The only benefit of such worlds is the likelihood that 
humans are just as poisonous to local life, though many 
large predators don’t realize that until after they devour 
some luckless colonist.
Types of Biosphere
Biosphere remnants are the wreckage of a ruined ecol-
ogy. Petrified trees, drifts of preserved bones, forests 
of dead plant life; something killed all the life on this 
planet in the relatively recent past. It may have been the 
exercise of a maltech planet-buster weapon, or a mu-
tant microbe introduced by human colonists, or some 
volcanic eruption or asteroid impact that plunged the 
world into decades of frozen night.
Any local civilization not sophisticated enough to 
escape the planet likely died when it did. Their ruins 
and remains might be found throughout the desolate 
wastes, along with more clues as to the cause of the 
devastation.
Microbial life is often the only thing that exists on 
the more inhospitable planets, yet the wide variety of 
environments that can accommodate life means that 
these little beasts show up in some of the most un -
likely places. Some varieties of slime mold have even 
managed to evolve on corrosive-atmosphere planets, 
forming a mucous-like outer shell against the atmo -
sphere and then feeding and growing off the chemical 
byproducts of its erosion.
Microbial life can also be dangerous. While most 
alien microbes are unable to infect or harm the radically 
different biology of humans, some show enough inge-
nuity to accomplish even that difficult feat. Rumors of 
terrible “space plagues” that leave behind only drifting 
ships and garbled warnings remain a steady staple at 
spacer bars throughout the known universe.
No native biosphere is occasionally found on even 
the most temperate and otherwise habitable worlds. 
For one reason or another, life simply never evolved 
on these worlds, leaving them a blank slate for the ag-
ricultural and ecological efforts of humans. If the world 
is otherwise amenable to Terran life, such planets can 
be enormously fertile and agriculturally rich.
They can also be disasters waiting to happen. Pre-
tech xenobiologists compiled standardized colonization 
packages of plants, animals, and insect life designed to 
expand smoothly and evenly to fill the niches of an un-
inhabited world. Not all colonists implemented these 
packages correctly, and some worlds had disasters or 
special circumstances that destabilized their efforts. 
Some empty worlds are now in a state of constant bi-
ological flux as the local ecology strives vainly to find 
some sort of equilibrium between the myriad imported 
species and their violent struggle.
More subtly, these worlds can be suddenly and 
drastically destabilized by the import of some offworld 
plant or animal. With no strong native ecology to fight 
off interlopers, the wrong beast or bug can lay waste to 
whole continents. These planets tend to be extremely 
paranoid about importation of foreign life forms.
Human-miscible biospheres are those in which 
some substantial portion of the native life is biologi -
cally compatible with human nutritional needs. The 
local plants and animals may not be tasty or terribly 
nourishing, but they can support life without the se-
rious importation of Terran crop seeds and livestock.
Even the friendlier human-miscible biospheres 
often lack the wide variety of edibles that evolved on 
Earth, and the natives often supplement their stocks 
of local foods with limited Terran agriculture. Exotic 
foods, spices, and liquors can be worth interstellar im-
portation to feed the hunger for novelty possessed by 
the elites on these worlds.
Unfortunately, the fact that humans can eat some 
native life means that it is very likely that some na -
tive life can eat humans as well. Large predators and 
diseases capable of human infection are by no means 
uncommon on these worlds, and small colonies can be 
hard-pressed to survive them.
Immiscible biospheres are not friendly to humans. 
None of the local plants or animals are edible, and any-
thing the colony needs to eat will have to be grown 
from Terran stock. Worse, it is common for the pollen 
and other microbial life of these worlds to be highly 
allergenic to humans, requiring the regular use of tai -
lored antiallergenics to prevent eventual respiratory 
failure or exotic immune-system reactions.
2d6 Type
2 Remnant biosphere
3 Microbial life forms exist
4-5 No native biosphere
6-8 Human-miscible biosphere
9-10 Immiscible biosphere
11 Hybrid biosphere
12 Engineered biosphere
===== PAGE 169 =====
bioSPhere •165 
These worlds are exceptionally susceptible to the 
temptation of human gengineering. Despite the per -
sistent drawbacks, genetic flaws, and handicaps that hu-
man gengineering usually introduces in a subject, the 
desperate need to eat can drive worlds to wholesale 
experimentation on their progeny. The resultant al -
tered humans are often able to digest the local food, but 
commonly pay for it in shortened life spans, physical 
disabilities, or an inability to consume Terran food -
stuffs. Sometimes the consequences are worse still.
Immiscible biospheres produce some of the most 
exotic plants and animals in human space. Unfettered 
by the limits of familiar evolutionary patterns, crea -
tures of bizarre beauty and strange configurations are 
found on many of these worlds. Many lack the intelli -
gence to realize that humans are as poisonous to them 
as they are to humans.
Hybrid biospheres are a stable intermixing of Ter-
ran flora and fauna with local life forms. Most such 
worlds have been colonized for centuries before the 
Silence, giving the local ecology time to shake out into 
a relatively stable configuration of Earth-born organ-
isms and native life. The native biology may or may 
not be miscible with human life, but it is unlikely to be 
particularly hostile in any case, or else the interloping 
life forms would not have been able to get a foothold 
on the planet.
Hybrid biospheres often show strange examples 
of symbiosis and adaptation, with plants and animals 
forming new alliances. Large predators from one world 
may find themselves subsisting on herds of herbivo -
rous alien life, while Terran vegetation provides suste-
nance for large populations of small, furred, insect-like 
grazers. Familiar animals may show seemingly bizarre 
behavior patterns that have formed in response to local 
conditions, perhaps becoming larger or more aggres -
sive, or having been gengineered for compatibility.
Engineered biospheres are among the rarest, as 
they require enormous time and effort on the part of 
a highly advanced civilization. Whatever life exists on 
this planet has been extensively altered by an alien race 
or by advanced pretech gengineering methods. Some 
such worlds are paradise planets, carefully sculpted by 
some fabulously wealthy predecessor to suit their own 
tastes. Others are living forges, where foodstuffs and 
refined minerals are produced as byproducts from the 
basic organic processes of the world’s biosphere.
Such worlds tend to be fragile. Many engineered 
worlds are dependent upon regular stabilizing work to 
prevent genetic drift and adaptations that do not serve 
the creator’s purpose. Without regular pruning and 
adjustment, engineered biospheres can go badly awry. 
Some end up leaving nothing but genetic wreckage 
in their wake, while others go wrong in more subtle 
ways. Where once the biosphere existed to serve the 
inhabitants, a creaking engineered biosphere can leave 
the planet’s population chained to constant repair and 
maintenance efforts just to prevent a planetary collapse.
===== PAGE 170 =====
166• PoPulation
PoPulaTIon
Planetary populations hinge on a world’s habitabili -
ty. Worlds incapable of growing food on the planet’s 
surface are unlikely to have more than a few hundred 
thousand inhabitants at best, and truly inimical worlds 
might be lucky to have a tenth as many. As a rule of 
thumb, a world ought to have some kind of human 
habitation on it unless the GM has a specific purpose 
for it in mind. A world untouched by human presence 
can be interesting in many ways, but without elabora -
tion there’s little to distinguish it from the next airless 
ball of rock.
Humans breed quickly, and will tend to push up 
against the limits of a world’s capacity to feed and sup-
port them. Some cultures with sufficient tech might 
rely on contraceptives and birth licensing to ensure 
sufficient food for its population, while others might 
choose or be forced to leave matters to simple Mal -
thusian culling. Wars and diseases may also serve as 
a check on population, or in some cases, cultures may 
find themselves so wealthy, self-absorbed and comfort-
able as to voluntarily choose not to reproduce.
Population Sizes
Failed colonies are occasionally found dotting the worlds 
of human space. Some date back to the First Wave of 
human colonization more than a thousand years ago, 
while others are more recent efforts that guttered out 
under the strains of a colony’s birth.
Pirate attacks might have wiped out a young col-
ony, as might a hostile biosphere, alien attack, internal 
dissension, disease outbreaks, failure of vital colonial 
equipment, or any one of a hundred other disasters. 
The ruins of the colony might still have valuable pre-
tech artifacts, however, or colonization deeds autho -
rized by neighboring worlds. A few survivors might 
even have clung to life in the intervening centuries, 
maintaining some sort of society in the wreckage of 
their ancestors’ work.
Outposts are rarely composed of more than a few 
hundred or few thousand colonists at the most. Out -
posts are either very new colonies that have not have 
the requisite time to grow or they are uncolonized 
worlds that just happen to have a naval or corporate 
base on the surface.
Corporate or military outposts aren’t intended to 
be completely self-sufficient. While large outposts are 
often forced to raise their own food supplies, replace-
ment personnel, spare parts, and advanced tech must 
all be brought in from elsewhere. Such temporary out-
posts are known to find themselves in sudden distress 
when a vital supply ship fails to make its drop or when 
some local threat proves more than the staff can handle.
Colonial outposts tend to be better equipped but 
with less outside backing. Such natives expect to live 
and die on the world, and are more inclined to build 
permanent structures and local improvements. Many 
are exiles, malcontents, or others incapable of tolerat -
ing the world that sent them forth, and it can make for 
a somewhat explosive mix in a young colony. These 
pioneers tend to be very friendly towards visiting 
starships, as they are often dependent upon free trad-
ers and tramp merchants to bring them vital supplies 
or news of the sector.
Some “outposts” are really just the stubborn, per-
sistent survivors of a long-failed colonization attempt. 
These cultures can survive for centuries, perpetually 
culled by the dangers of the world until the survivors 
are little more than one more ragged element of the 
local ecology.
Fewer than a million inhabitants are often found on 
newly-colonized worlds, or those with limited arable 
land. This class has the widest range of results, from 
societies barely large enough to avoid inbreeding to 
minor worlds of several hundred thousand locals strug-
gling against hostile local conditions.
For worlds with a very small population, settle -
ments tend to be clustered close to one another for 
mutual support and efficient exploitation of land. The 
atmosphere might be something like that of a vil -
lage-dotted countryside, with too few people to support 
large, specialized cities. The major settlement of the 
planet is usually built around the spaceport.
Politics on planets with so few people tend to be 
very personal in nature. Individual leaders can some -
times address the entire population of a world at a 
single meeting, and networks of family, friends, and 
employees can dominate the local social life. This small 
population combined with limited outside contact can 
result in somewhat… unusual societies more strongly 
influenced by a leader’s personal quirks than a more 
populous planet might be. Some such worlds can grow 
decidedly unhealthy in their customs and traditions.
Hundreds of thousands of inhabitants make up 
the population of many frontier worlds, usually ones 
with adequate supplies of arable land and surface condi-
tions amenable to a human without a vacc suit or filter 
mask. This level of population is also usually the most 
that a world at TL4 can support using only artificial 
hydroponic complexes and sealed agricultural systems, 
2d6 Type
2 Failed colony
3 Outpost
4-5 Fewer than a million inhabitants
6-8 Several million inhabitants
9-10 Hundreds of millions of inhabitants
11 Billions of inhabitants
12 Alien inhabitants
===== PAGE 171 =====
PoPulation •167 
so less hospitable planets rarely have more than this 
many inhabitants.
At a hundred thousand citizens or more, city-states 
and hub settlements start to form, and some major po-
litical divisions might exist beneath the overall plane-
tary government. Regional variations start to become 
present as towns and smaller settlements start to assert 
their own cultural traits. Young colonies rarely have 
much of a framework for resolving these new tensions, 
and it’s not uncommon for outsiders to end up as cats-
paws for varying factions.
A hundred thousand inhabitants is normally 
the smallest population that can create spike drive-
equipped starships. Less populous worlds rarely have 
the broad range of specialists and workers necessary 
to build such ships, even if they possess the necessary 
technical information. Even at this threshold, main -
taining any kind of astronautic industry would require 
the determined focus of the entire society. Only at pop-
ulations of a million-plus inhabitants is there enough 
of an industrial margin to allow for less determined 
construction of spike drive starships.
Millions of inhabitants are found on some of the 
more populous frontier worlds, those planets with an 
excellent climate and soil for agriculture. These worlds 
teem with human life compared to most of their neigh-
bors, and if they have sufficient technological exper -
tise to build spike drives, they probably are among the 
significant powers of the sector. The sheer amount 
of labor and expertise they can put into their projects 
dwarfs the capabilities of less populated worlds.
Some worlds of this type fail to coalesce under a 
unified planetary government, however, and turn most 
of their attention to intra-planetary quarrels between 
different nations or city-states. Full-scale planetary 
wars have been known to break out on such worlds, 
with some being reduced to burnt-out cinders by some 
maltech weapon or by nuclear attacks against regions 
stripped of their nuke snuffers.
Billions of inhabitants on a world is a freak occur -
rence in most sectors, a circumstance dependent on 
almost perfect planetary conditions, a First Wave date 
of colonization, a very large initial colonial expedition, 
and a strong cultural imperative for reproduction. 
These worlds have been colonized for almost a thou-
sand years, and have likely gone through substantial 
cultural development and change since their founding.
Planets with this many inhabitants tend to come 
in two main varieties. The more common is that of 
regional hegemon, leveraging its enormous reserves 
of labor and scientific personnel to build hundreds or 
thousands of starships. Some hegemons might even 
have the transport weight and personnel available to 
colonize or conquer their less powerful neighbors out-
right, though most hegemons prefer the safer route of 
docile client states rather than outright conquest.
Not all such worlds have the necessary resources 
to build starships, even when the labor is cheap and 
abundant. These worlds tend to take a different route, 
becoming balkanized, conflict-torn planets not unlike 
a mid-20th-century Earth. Resource wars are common 
and local politics revolve around byzantine feuds and 
ancient slights. Technology on such planets tends to be 
very uneven; it is limited or nonexistent in fields that 
depend on unavailable resources, but the natives often 
show remarkable sophistication in making the most of 
what they have available.
Alien civilizations are even rarer than massively hu-
man-populated planets, but they can be found in some 
sectors. On these worlds, any human presence is either 
nonexistent or simply a token contingent of traders and 
diplomats. The actual number of aliens may range from 
a few tens of thousands to teeming worlds of billions.
Alien civilizations appear to be no more immune 
to conflict, disaster, and decadence than that of humans, 
and most alien worlds are isolated planets. Some sec -
tors were known to be dominated by alien empires be-
fore the Scream, but most inhabited worlds found by 
colonial surveyors consisted of indigenous, low-tech 
sapients who evolved on the world, or else were the 
decaying remnants of a former empire that had fallen 
apart into isolated colonial worlds.
This fate of growth, expansion, colonization, and 
collapse appears to be a very common event in the gal-
axy. Countless alien ruins and lost deep-space artifacts 
indicate that cycles of growth and decay have been 
going on for millennia, and there is little way to tell 
how many alien empires have swept over what is now 
human space before dwindling to rotting worlds and 
then empty ruins.
Population Growth
Most worlds have reached an equilibrium state with 
their current populations. While there may be some 
variation, few worlds are likely to increase much with-
out a drastic change in the local conditions.
For primitive worlds, this limit has been reached 
in brutally Malthusian fashion. The locals simply can-
not support any substantial increase of their numbers, 
and additional population is restricted by widespread 
contraceptive use, selective infanticide, or regular 
bouts of mass starvation. The only way out of this trap 
is through advanced technology that can overcome 
the local resource limitations, after which such worlds 
might explode in population over a scant few decades.
For more advanced worlds, this limit tends to be 
organic to the culture. With sophisticated technolo -
gy to supply abundant entertainment and sustenance, 
there is less importance in having offspring to labor 
for the family or nourish its aged members. Individu-
als become more interested in their own pleasures and 
ambitions than in the burdensome work of child-rear-
ing, and population tends to slope downward until 
cultural mores reinforce a certain basic minimum of 
reproduction. A drastic change in cultural attitudes or 
an increase in societal uncertainty can alter this rapidly.
===== PAGE 172 =====
168• teCh level
TeCh leVel
The tech level of a world represents not only the lev-
el of technological progress and scientific knowledge 
available on it, but also the world’s ability to translate 
that knowledge into effective production. A world 
might still guard texts describing elaborate principles 
of petrochemical manipulation, but without oil or 
fossil fuels on the planet they have no way to use the 
information. It is this kind of resource limitation that 
most often keeps a world caught at a low level of tech. 
Without bottleneck resources such as petrochemicals 
or radioactives, they can’t develop the technology that 
would allow them to do without such resources.
Tech level 4 is the baseline level of development for 
planets capable of building fusion plants, spike-drive 
equipped starships, limited longevity enhancements, 
and basic energy weapons. A planet without this level 
of development is effectively cut off from interstellar 
news and trade without the good offices of far traders, 
explorers, or scavenger fleet contacts.
Tech levels are rough approximations, and every 
planet is going to have variance within that range. A 
decayed colony is unlikely to have forgotten the basics 
of human anatomy and practical wound care, but they 
may not have the local resources to fashion medical 
tools more sophisticated than obsidian scalpels and 
herbal poultices. By the same token, a primitive world 
might have local resources that are exceptionally useful 
in one or two narrow ranges of technology.
Planetary Tech Levels
Tech level 0 represents a world with technologies simi-
lar to neolithic-era humanity. Very few worlds collapse 
this far without dying out completely, and so a world 
this primitive is very rare in human space. The world 
is so profoundly devoid of useful resources that the 
natives may simply not have anything better to work 
with than rocks and native vegetation.
Natives of a world at this tech level might retain 
elaborate cultural artifacts and a very sophisticated 
society. Existing resources tend to be exploited to the 
hilt, with large populations producing massive stone 
cities, human-powered engines for irrigation, and vast 
displays of foodstuffs and craft work for the ruling class. 
Despite this, the lack of metal, domesticated beasts of 
burden, and petrochemicals puts a hard stop on the 
technological development of most of these worlds.
Responses to far traders and other interstellar 
travelers will vary with the local culture. The lack of 
quick communications methods tends to result in large 
populations breaking up into numerous smaller re -
gional cultures, and the friendly prince of one domain 
might neighbor an implacably hostile sage-king. Most 
“lostworlders” have a keen appreciation for the benefits 
these strangers from the sky can bring them, and will 
bargain accordingly.
Some worlds might retain crisply rational records 
of their colonization and downfall. Others might pre-
serve tales of a starry origin in legends and story. A few 
might have forgotten their origins entirely, and view 
sky-born humans as gods or messengers of the divine. 
Such awe rarely lasts very long once the merchants or 
pirates who landed make their purposes clear.
Tech level 1 worlds have managed to find and ex -
ploit metal deposits and likely have imported or domes-
ticated beasts of burden. Those worlds with easy access 
to fossil fuels or a similarly energy-dense substance can 
advance to greater things, but a culture trapped at TL1 
is unlikely to have access to such helpful resources. A 
few worlds have enough usable plant matter or other 
combustibles to make steam engines feasible, but those 
with very much of such a resource usually make the 
leap to the next tech level eventually.
As a consequence, tech level 1 worlds tend to be 
caught at much the same general level of development 
as their tech level 0 cousins. They may have elaborate 
social structures and cultural development, but they 
are unable to mechanize without some energy-dense 
resource to serve as fuel. The scavenged hulks of their 
ancestors’ fusion plants may stand as mute temples to 
the achievements of their forebears, but without the 
tech necessary to repair and rebuild such edifices the 
world is dependent on purely local fuel sources.
Tech level 1 worlds tend to respond to visitors in 
much the same way as tech level 0 planets. The ruling 
class of these worlds is liable to be able to muster larger 
cities, bigger armies, and all the other perquisites that 
come from being able to work the available agricultural 
land with fewer hands.
Tech level 2 worlds are blessed with the presence of 
fossil fuels or a feasibly abundant biofuel source. Inter-
nal combustion engines are crude things compared to 
the power of a fusion plant, but they can be built with 
primitive tools and a basic degree of education. The 
mechanization that results from this resource vastly 
increases the efficiency of local farming, the speed of 
travel, and the productivity of factory workers.
Most tech level 2 worlds are “knockdowns”; plan-
ets that once had a much higher degree of sophisti -
cation but were recently crippled by disease, disaster, 
2d6 Type
2 TL0, neolithic-level technology
3 TL1, medieval technology
4-5 TL2, early Industrial Age tech
6-8 TL4, modern postech
9-10 TL3, tech like that of present-day Earth
11 TL4+, postech with specialties
12 TL5, pretech with surviving infrastructure
===== PAGE 173 =====
teCh level •169 
or invasion. The natives tend to be keenly aware of 
the glories of former generations, and work fiercely to 
redevelop lost techniques and reclaim old knowledge.
Few tech level 2 worlds produce much that’s worth 
interstellar trade. Most foodstuffs are too bulky and 
cheap to make it worth a captain’s time. Some worlds 
have rare ore deposits, but the natives have no reason 
to dig them until a merchant makes it worth their while 
to set up a whole new industry for export. Some such 
worlds barter the relics of their ancestors in exchange 
for educational materials or rare resources necessary 
for advancing local industry. Others feel forced to trade 
native work contracts for dangerous, dirty labor in a 
bargain that’s little different from slave trading.
Tech level 3 worlds are those that have developed 
to a level much like that of the more advanced nations 
of late twentieth-century Earth. The main difference 
between tech level 3 worlds and level 4 worlds is the 
lack of fusion power or spike drive manufacture.
These worlds come in two major varieties. The 
first is a “knockdown” world that formerly had tech 
level 4 technologies before some catastrophe or pirate 
attack destroyed their knowledge and industrial base. 
Some of the wrecked infrastructure might have been 
irreplaceable, and the world must struggle to regain its 
former level of technological production. Worlds in 
this condition tend to have rather small populations 
that are susceptible to the loss of a few concentrated 
groups of experts.
The second major variety is a world that suffered 
a severe disaster shortly after colonization and has 
been forced to painstakingly build up their technolog -
ical base ever since. Some of these worlds date back to 
the First Wave of colonization a thousand years ago, 
driven into near-neolithic conditions by some outside 
pressure before slowly and painfully rebuilding their 
technological base through purely indigenous efforts. 
These worlds tend to have very large populations if the 
world’s climate permits, as they have been colonized for 
quite some time.
Simply providing a world with the necessary tech-
nical data for advancement doesn’t mean that advance-
ment will be quick or even. Even if a tech level 3 world 
has the necessary resources to build tech level 4 devices, 
it may take as much as a generation for a world to build 
the necessary infrastructure and resource extraction 
enterprises. The time may be longer still if the domi-
nant cultures are uneasy with the new technology.
Tech level 4 worlds are the most common in hu -
man space, and their technical expertise is the baseline 
for modern post-Silence “postech”. These worlds can 
create spike drives rated up to drive-3, fusion pow -
er plants, grav vehicles, simple energy weapons, and 
medicines that extend human life to a hundred years of 
vigorous good health. They can manage sophisticated 
gengineering on simple life forms, and some tech level 
4 worlds have even attempted to improve the genetic 
structures of human life itself. These attempts have yet 
to produce results without severe drawbacks, but some 
such worlds remain populated by altered humanity 
designed to cope with local conditions more perfectly 
than baseline humans.
Most worlds with regular interstellar contact and 
the necessary raw resources eventually gravitate to -
wards this level of technological expertise. It may take 
decades, or even centuries in the case of more retro -
grade worlds, but this tech level is the highest that can 
readily be achieved by most planets.
Tech level 4 with specialties is an unusual case of 
a normal tech level 4 world that has retained some 
pretech industries or has developed their own local 
technical expertise beyond baseline postech in certain 
specific fields.
Most such specialties are relatively narrow in 
scope; grav tech, medicine, hydroponics, force field 
generation, or some field of roughly similar breadth. 
These specialties are usually either the product of a 
few irreplaceable pretech manufactories or the result 
of some unique local resource that serves amazingly 
well for the purpose at hand. In both cases, the world 
will jealously guard the tech, and much local conflict 
may relate to control over these resources.
These worlds tend to have substantial amounts of 
interstellar trade from neighboring worlds interested 
in their tech. The ruling elite of the world can be os-
tentatious about display of this wealth.
Tech level 5  is the highest tech level that might 
merit random placement. A world with this level of 
technological expertise has somehow managed to 
hold on to the majority of the pre-Scream technology 
base, and can produce a wide range of goods that are 
unknown on less sophisticated worlds. Miniaturized 
fusion plants, drive-6 rated spike drives, exotic grav 
weaponry, and even the development of psionics-based 
“psitech” is possible on such a world.
Pretech manufacturing was largely dependent on 
specially-trained industrial psychics. With the loss of 
their unique disciplines in the Scream, most worlds 
that retain this level of tech classification were forced 
to substitute slower, less precise methods that sharply 
curtailed their production efficiency. Barring the pro-
foundly unlikely happenstance of this world’s redevel -
opment of the lost disciplines, their maximum indus-
trial output is sharply limited. Even on worlds such as 
this, most technology is likely mass-produced postech, 
with only important goods produced to pretech levels 
of quality.
A world with this level of technology is almost 
certainly a regional hegemon, one of the most pow -
erful and influential worlds in the sector. Even those 
worlds that have no imperial ambitions have enormous 
influence simply through the vast superiority of their 
starships and military technology.
===== PAGE 174 =====
1 70• SyStem PointS of intereSt
addITIonal sysTem PoInTs of InTeresT
The world you’re creating is the most interesting or 
important place in this solar system, but it may not be 
the only one. If you wish, you can decorate the system 
with other points of interest worth PC attention. You 
might do this at the same time you roll up the system’s 
primary world, or you could wait until it becomes a 
significant point in play.
Adding Other Worlds
For simplicity’s sake, it’s often best to just stick with 
one inhabited world. The original colonists would have 
chosen the most human-habitable planet in the system, 
and unless they grew dramatically in the time before 
the Scream they wouldn’t have had reason to colonize 
less favorable planets before the catastrophe knocked 
out their spaceflight capabilities. Other rocks might be 
floating in the system, but they’re probably barren and 
uninhabited.
If you do decide to add additional inhabited planets 
to the system, you can generate them normally, but 
you’ll want to ask yourself a few special questions. The 
table below offers some ideas for potential answers.
First, what is the origin of the world, and how does 
it relate to the primary world in the system? Knowing 
where this secondary planet’s inhabitants came from 
can often give you answers to a host of other questions.
Second, how do they feel about the primary world? 
If you generate three or more worlds, you’ll want to 
decide how each of them feels about the other. This 
feeling may not necessarily be reciprocal.
Third, what’s the major point of contact between 
them and the primary world? If the two are on a friend-
ly basis, this contact might be something that benefits 
them both, while a more hostile relationship could 
make it a point they’re fighting over or otherwise 
struggling to maintain dominance in. In the case of a 
mutual threat, it might be something both are facing 
with a united front, or it could be the two are struggling 
to see who gets thrown to the wolves first.
With these three answers in hand you’ll be able 
to flesh out this second planet more easily, adding in 
elements from the primary world as needed.
Other Points of Interest
Aside from other inhabited planets, a system can con-
tain a number of other settlements or stations that 
could draw PC attention. Most of the time these sta -
tions can simply be assumed; a TL4 world is going to 
have asteroid mines and refueling stations and listening 
posts, and most of these locations have no importance 
to the game until the PCs go looking for them.
Other times, however, you’ll want to pre-seed the 
system with a few interesting locations. The adjacent 
table offers a number of different possibilities to roll 
or choose from.
Most of the points are intended to be remote 
outposts of the primary world. They might be deep-
space research stations, refueling stations on the edge 
of the system, bases on isolated gas-giant moons that 
have valuable resources, or other far-flung tendrils of 
a greater civilization.
Some of these points could be more independent 
establishments. A deep-space existence can be made 
largely self-sustaining with TL4 engineering, though 
the life there is likely primitive and tenuous. With 
enough cobbled-together defenses and a lack of any -
thing particularly worth stealing, exile groups, recluses, 
and other antisocial sorts can make themselves a pri -
vate domain that no local planet cares about enough to 
commit the resources required to destroy it.
Others among these remote stations become out-
posts for pirates and other reavers, usually operating 
under some deniable cover or protected by enough 
defensive installations to dissuade anything short of a 
major military assault. The calculus for these robbers 
is simple; the effort a planetary navy would have to 
make to get rid of them must be more than the cost of 
tolerating their depredations.
Few of these anarchic outposts last for very long. 
The stronger and more active they become, the more 
pressing it is for their victims to take steps to disperse 
them. Barring some pirate king both charismatic and 
foolhardy, most such outposts are primed for quick 
abandonment when a fleet shows up on the sensors.
d8 Origin of the World Current Relationship Contact Point
1 Recent colony from the primary world Confirmed hatred of each other Trade in vital goods
2 Refuge for exiles from primary Active cold war between them Shared religion
3 Founded ages ago by a different group Old grudges or resentments Mutual language
4 Founded long before the primary world Cultural disgust and avoidance Entertainment content
5 Lost ancient colony of the primary Polite interchange and trade Shared research
6 Colony recently torn free of the primary Cultural admiration for primary Threat to both of them
7 Long-standing cooperative colony world Long-standing friendship Shared elite families
8 Recent interstellar colony from elsewhere Unflinching mutual loyalty Exploiting shared resource
===== PAGE 175 =====
SyStem PointS of intereSt •1 71 
d8 A point… d10 …occupied by… d10 …with this situation.
1 Deep-space station 1-2 Dangerously odd transhumans 1-2 Systems breaking down
3-4 Freeze-dried ancient corpses 3-4 Foreign sabotage attempt
5-6 Secretive military observers 5-6 Black market for the elite
7-8 Eccentric oligarch and minions 7-8 Vault for dangerous pretech
9-0 Deranged but brilliant scientist 9-0 Supply base for pirates
2 Asteroid base 1-2 Zealous religious sectarians 1-2 Life support is threatened
3-4 Failed rebels from another world 3-4 Base needs a new asteroid
5-6 Wage-slave corporate miners 5-6 Dug out something nasty
7-8 Independent asteroid prospectors 7-8 Fighting another asteroid
9-0 Pirates masquerading as otherwise 9-0 Hit a priceless vein of ore
3 Remote moon base 1-2 Unlucky corporate researchers 1-2 Something dark has awoken
3-4 Reclusive hermit genius 3-4 Criminals trying to take over
5-6 Remnants of a failed colony 5-6 Moon plague breaking out
7-8 Military listening post 7-8 Desperate for vital supplies
9-0 Lonely overseers and robot miners 9-0 Rich but badly-protected
4 Ancient orbital ruin 1-2 Robots of dubious sentience 1-2 Trying to stop it awakening
3-4 Trigger-happy scavengers 3-4 Meddling with strange tech
5-6 Government researchers 5-6 Impending tech calamity
7-8 Military quarantine enforcers 7-8 A terrible secret is unearthed
9-0 Heirs of the original alien builders 9-0 Fighting outside interlopers
5 Research base 1-2 Experiments that have gotten loose 1-2 Perilous research underway
3-4 Scientists from a major local corp 3-4 Hideously immoral research
5-6 Black-ops governmental researchers 5-6 Held hostage by outsiders
7-8 Secret employees of a foreign power 7-8 Science monsters run amok
9-0 Aliens studying the human locals 9-0 Selling black-market tech
6 Asteroid belt 1-2 Grizzled belter mine laborers 1-2 Ruptured rock released a peril
3-4 Ancient automated guardian drones 3-4 Foreign spy ships hide there
5-6 Survivors of destroyed asteroid base 5-6 Gold rush for new minerals
7-8 Pirates hiding out among the rocks 7-8 Ancient ruins dot the rocks
9-0 Lonely military patrol base staff 9-0 War between rival rocks
7 Gas giant mine 1-2 Miserable gas-miner slaves or serfs 1-2 Things are emerging below
3-4 Strange robots and their overseers 3-4 They need vital supplies
5-6 Scientists studying the alien life 5-6 The workers are in revolt
7-8 Scrappers in the ruined old mine 7-8 Pirates secretly fuel there
9-0 Impoverished separatist group 9-0 Alien remnants were found
8 Refueling station 1-2 Half-crazed hermit caretaker 1-2 A ship is in severe distress
3-4 Sordid purveyors of decadent fun 3-4 Pirates have taken over
5-6 Extortionate corporate minions 5-6 Has corrupt customs agents
7-8 Religious missionaries to travelers 7-8 Foreign saboteurs are active
9-0 Brainless automated vendors 9-0 Deep-space alien signal
===== PAGE 176 =====

===== PAGE 177 =====
ADVENTURE CREATION
After developing one or more worlds, a GM ought to 
have a fairly substantial list of Friends, Enemies, Places, 
Complications, and Things appropriate to a given plan-
et. An experienced GM may well be able to assemble 
an interesting adventure out of these pieces, but even 
the most practiced designer might be hard-pressed to 
come up with enough interesting setups to fill out an 
entire sector.
The method that follows is by no means the best 
or only way to devise an adventure, but it’s a procedure 
that will do the job for a working GM. This method 
work best if you’ve already generated a world using 
the tools in the Sector Creation chapter, but the basic 
outlines can function even without such support.
Identify Your Needs
The first step in creating an adventure is identifying 
what, precisely, you need the adventure to do. If you’ve 
been following the recommended pattern for running 
your campaign, the last session ended with you asking 
the players what goal they wanted to pursue next time. 
If this is for the first adventure to kick off a campaign, 
you might need something that introduces the players 
to the setting and gives them a short adventure to get 
them working together smoothly. If you’re creating 
backup content that you can deploy rapidly when the 
players catch you off guard, then that might be a third 
sort of purpose behind your work. Whatever it is, you 
need to keep this basic goal in mind as you create the 
adventure content. Adventures are created to be play -
able content at the table, so it needs to work for you.
Often, players are somewhat equivocal when they 
tell you what sort of effort they plan to make for the 
next session. Sometimes their intentions will be clear 
and direct, such as pursuing a nemesis who got away 
from them last time with a cargo hold full of alien arti-
facts. Other times, it will be something more nebulous, 
like “Find a good deal on cargo for our ship” or “Explore 
some of the alien ruins you mentioned were on this 
world”, or “Do something really unkind to the planetary 
duke who shot down our starship”.
When things are clear, you’ll have an easy time 
creating an adventure. If they’re chasing the nemesis, 
you know you need to create an adventure revolving 
around them pursuing this evildoer and encountering 
plausible challenges on the way. If the guidance you’ve 
been given is less precise, more of the details are up to 
you. You might create an adventure about a “bargain” 
cargo deal that threatens to go very bad, or draw up an 
alien ruin for them to explore, or introduce a plucky 
band of anti-ducal rebels for the PCs to encounter, 
along with the problems those rebels have. So long as 
what you’re making is logically connected to what they 
want from you, you’ll be able to deliver a fine time at 
the table.
Sometimes, however, the players ask for some -
thing you know is going to be impossible, or some -
thing that you know will be rapidly reconsidered by 
the group. Maybe the nemesis has fled into the bowels 
of an ultra-high-security orbital citadel, or you know 
that the duke is actually dying of biopsionic cancer and 
will be dead in a few more days. If the information is 
available to the PCs, you can point this out to them 
and let them reconsider their goals. They might give 
up on pursuing the nemesis, for example, or change 
their goal to that of finding some way to penetrate the 
defenses around the orbital station. It’s important not 
to completely shut down impractical plans, but instead 
suggest alternate routes that might turn “impossible” 
into merely “very difficult”.
Be willing to follow the players’ lead on alternate 
routes. If there’s not a compelling reason to shoot down 
an idea or assumption about the world, run with it. If 
they ask if there are rebels or traitors or spy networks 
they might be able to contact to get the information 
they need to crack the defenses, then tell them yes. If 
the players are going to be kind enough to map out 
your adventure creation needs for you, let them do the 
work unless there’s a very good reason otherwise.
Other times, however, the players don’t have the 
information they’d need to realize that their intentions 
are impractical. You know they’re going to get ten min-
utes into the next session before they realize that what 
they planned to do is totally impossible. You can’t write 
them an adventure that gives them a chance of succeed-
ing at the goal, not without violating common sense or 
already-established game world facts, so what do you 
do in such situations? There are two general ways to 
handle this: anticipate their next course of action, or 
prepare filler content. 
There are times when you can tell that the players 
are going to hit the obstacle and immediately look for 
a way around it. Maybe they discover the nemesis has 
fled to the orbital at the start of the next adventure, 
but a convenient NPC suggests that there’s a way to 
get the passcodes onto the station if the PCs are able 
to contact a certain information broker. You write the 
adventure to help you handle the PCs’ attempts to find 
and convince the broker to help them, because you’re 
confident that the group isn’t going to just shrug and 
let the nemesis go.
On other occasions, however, you don’t have that 
confidence. You really aren’t sure what the PCs will de-
cide to do when they see their initial goal is impractical. 
In this case, you write some filler content, designed to 
give the players something fun to do for the session 
while they figure out their next plan. This sort of filler 
content can often be written far in advance of its actual 
need, and over the course of a long campaign it’s likely 
you’ll end up with several sessions worth of this prep 
===== PAGE 178 =====
1 74• adventure Creation
work kept ready in your GM folder, available for de -
ployment whenever the PCs start doing things you’re 
not prepared to handle yet. This section will include 
some specific advice on how to build this kind of filler 
content and how to insert it into play.
In the end, the goal at this stage is to have a clear 
idea of what sort of content you need to have prepped 
for the next session. Once you know what kind of ma-
terial you need to make, you can go on to the next stage.
Choose Ingredients
The next step in creating the adventure is to look back 
at your sector information and the tags and elements 
you’ve rolled up for the planet the PCs are on. You’ve 
already created some NPCs, complications, and places 
to work with, so now’s your chance to take advantage 
of your preparations. If the PCs are somewhere that 
hasn’t had that work done already, take a moment to 
fabricate an appropriate Friend, Enemy, Complication, 
Thing, and Place suitable for the setting. You’ll use these 
ingredients to create the adventure in the next step.
While you can pull the ingredients directly from 
your sector file, you can also take a moment to custom-
ize them to the situation. Maybe there’s a particular 
NPC you know is going to show up next time, given 
the party’s ambitions, or there’s a specific macguffin 
that’s in circulation right now. You can adjust these 
ingredients to fit the specific circumstances and help 
smooth transitions between adventures. The same peo-
ple can keep showing up when it’s logical that they’d 
be involved, and the other elements can persist to help 
give a sense of continuity to events.
It’s also useful to pull in regular callbacks from 
prior adventures. The things that PCs do have conse -
quences, and sometimes those consequences persist for 
quite some time. Try to put at least one callback to prior 
events or people into each adventure, even if it’s just a 
cameo from an NPC, or a newsflash giving up-to-date 
reporting on some situation the PCs were involved in. 
The more that the PCs feel like they’re really making 
a difference in the campaign world, the more engaged 
they’re going to be with the setting.
Try to make sure that the ingredients you use are 
logical and coherent elements of your campaign setting. 
Pulling antagonists or macguffins from the starry void 
can be convenient, but an ingredient that just comes 
out of nowhere, with no foreshadowing or visible con-
nection to the rest of the campaign, is an ingredient 
that some groups might find jarring and difficult to 
interact with. In the absence of some visible connec -
tion to the rest of the campaign, it’s hard for a party 
to get their hands around an ingredient and deduce 
intelligent, rational ways to interact with it. A planetary 
tyrant they’ve known about for a few sessions is much 
easier to deal with than an alien overlord fresh out of 
drillspace, because the tyrant is part of a setting and 
context they’ve had a chance to understand.
Assemble the Outline
With the adventure ingredients in hand, it’s time to put 
together the basic outline of the adventure. An outline 
isn’t meant to fill in every detail and supply every fact 
you need to run the adventure, but merely to give you 
a basic idea of the adventure’s premise and point out 
the kind of information you’ll need to prepare for play.
If you’re pressed for time and don’t feel like as -
sembling your own outline, flip forward in this section 
to a list of one hundred plot seeds. Take your Friends, 
Enemies, Complications, and other world elements and 
slot them into a seed that looks appropriate to your 
needs. You now have your outline and can skip to the 
next step in creating the adventure.
If you’d rather spend more time developing the 
outline, you’ll want to pick three basic elements to 
make up its essential frame. Not every adventure in -
volves all three elements, but usually you’ll need rep -
resentative examples of each. You’ll need a Problem to 
drive the adventure, a Person to serve as an antagonist 
or point of entry to the Problem, and you’ll need a Place 
to set the events as they play out.
Your Problem is the core of your adventure, and 
is an unstable or untenable situation that the PCs can 
meaningfully affect. The players aren’t going to care 
about problems so big or so intractable that their ac -
tions won’t have any consequential effect. They’re 
going to be engaged with problems small enough, or 
specific enough, that they feel that their choices can 
really change the outcome.
Some Problems are self-attractive to the players. If 
the party wants to explore an alien ruin on this world, 
then simply putting an unexplored alien art museum 
where they can get at it will be enticement enough. The 
Problem is that the PCs want what’s inside the muse-
um, but there are some dangers or difficulties that are 
preventing them from plundering its age-old secrets. 
Your job in that case will be to make the overcoming of 
those difficulties interesting enough to satisfy the play-
ers. Whenever you have a situation where the players 
want X, your Problem can simply consist of placing X 
and then making it plausibly difficult to get to.
Other times, this isn’t going to be enough. Perhaps, 
the planet’s savage water barons are locked in a bloody 
struggle over control of the ancient Mandate-era hy-
droforming installation, control of which will leave 
one of them the undisputed master of the arid world. 
Certainly, the services of a small band of recklessly cou-
rageous adventurers could be vital in penetrating the 
installation’s automatic defenses, but why should the 
players care which tattooed savage gets to be master?
The Person is your way of connecting the players 
with the Problem, when the Problem is not one that 
naturally attracts their interest. The Person provides 
the human connection between the party and the sit -
uation, either through being a sympathetic figure who 
appeals to the group’s desire to help, or through being 
a dangerous antagonist who forces a response.
===== PAGE 179 =====
adventure Creation •1 75 
Of course, an adventure can involve more than 
one important NPC, and the players might end up with 
multiple reasons to engage with the Problem. But by 
focusing on at least one important Person, you make 
sure that the players have a real reason to care about 
the Problem and provide yourself with a contact point 
through which to pass on information about the situ -
ation. Even an antagonist can serve as a useful chance 
to dump setting info on the players and clue them in 
to adventure opportunities. A blood-distilling water 
baron who wipes out a sand village that helped the 
party in an earlier adventure informs the players not 
only that the water barons exist on the world, but that 
this particular vampire warlord is on his way to seize 
the hydroforming station.
At this stage, pick one Person to be the connec -
tion between the Problem and getting the PCs directly 
involved. Give them a name and a sentence or so de-
scribing how they’re going to pull the PCs in, but don’t 
worry about fleshing them out further at this point. 
You might add additional people to the mix if you know 
there are certain other NPCs you want to involve in the 
situation, but you can delay this to the next step.
Finally, you need to choose a Place where this ad-
venture is going to take place. Some sessions will occur 
in multiple Places, with the heroes gallivanting around 
the planet or solar system to deal with the Problem in 
multiple locations, but every adventure needs at least 
one Place to contain the action.
Sometimes the Place itself is the focus of the ac -
tion. If the PCs are looting an alien art museum, then 
the museum itself is going to be the major element of 
importance in the adventure. You’re going to have to 
make it a sufficiently interesting, complex, and engag-
ing location to support a full session’s adventure.
Other times, the Place is just a backdrop to the ac-
tion. A Problem involving tribal warfare in the steam-
ing xeno-jungles of some gas giant moon might have 
the terrain be a factor in things, but the jungle itself 
is not expected to be interesting enough to keep the 
players occupied with no further action. In these situ -
ations, the Place informs and shapes the Problem and 
gives color and flavor to events, but you don’t have to 
build it out into playable content by itself.
For now, define the Place that contains the Prob -
lem and make sure they’re connected in some way. 
Even if the Place is just giving flavor and style cues to 
the Problem, it should be clear to the players that what-
ever is going on here is a thing that is going on in this 
particular Place. Make the tribal warfare the kind that 
would occur in a jungle, with swift canoes fashioned of 
giant beetle shells and ambushes that take advantage of 
the perils of the alien jungle. The more the Place affects 
what is happening, the more it matters to the game.
Once you’ve chosen a Problem to deal with, a 
Person to connect the party with the situation, and a 
Place where all of this is going to unfold, you’re ready 
to move on to the next step in creating your adventure.
Fleshing It Out
You know the basic outline of the adventure, so this 
stage is where you add the extra information you need 
to actually play it out at the table. Some GMs need very 
little of this, and can improvise an evening’s play out 
of nothing more than an outline and a few sketched 
notes. Most GMs require a little more preparation to 
be comfortable with running an adventure. As you go 
through this process, let your own comfort level be 
your guide on how detailed and elaborate your prepa-
ration work should be, but make sure to cover the basic, 
critical parts of the adventure first before you spend 
time detailing contingencies and what-ifs.
To start the process, ask yourself the following 
questions to determine what sort of preparation work 
you need to do.
What maps do I need? If you expect the PCs to 
assault a location, you’re going to need a map good 
enough to support that. You can pull something close 
off the web, scribble in any tweaks needed for your ad-
venture, and use it accordingly. Maybe the abandoned 
missile silo plans you’ve downloaded are actually being 
used as a hidey-hole for a rebel leader, but all it takes 
is a few coats of GM paint and the players won’t know 
the difference.
The more carefully and intently the PCs are going 
to be interacting with a site, the more you’re going to 
need a map for it. A tense political meeting that takes 
place on some orbital resort station might not need a 
map at all if the focus is around the politics of it. If you 
know a terrorist group is going to bomb the talks and 
try to assassinate the diplomats, however, then you’re 
going to need enough of a map to support the PCs’ in-
evitable attempts to foil or escape the bloodshed.
What places do I need to make interesting? This is 
a special case that you’ll run into when the adventure 
involves exploring a site. A simple diagram of a loca-
tion is all you need to run a firefight there, but when 
the thrust of the adventure involves plumbing the un-
known mysteries of a site, there better be some half -
way-decent mysteries there to plumb. There should be 
perilous dangers, satisfying rewards, and interesting 
gubbins to manipulate in the place, elements informed 
by the map’s nature and origins. If the PCs are explor-
ing a Chittik hive-station, they ought to be finding 
things that make sense in the context of a man-eating 
alien beetle home, while an abandoned Mandate con-
trol center should be full of the dusty relics of that lost 
star-spanning human empire.
The art of creating an interesting site to explore is 
worth a book in itself, but the tools later in this chapter 
can help give you some ideas. Another useful source of 
inspiration exists in countless old-school fantasy ad -
venture modules; just dig through them for interest -
ing setpieces, reskin them as super-science, and flavor 
them with the style of whatever place they’re in. Never 
hesitate to plunder existing content for your game. You 
are but one GM, and your time and effort are finite.
===== PAGE 180 =====
1 76• adventure Creation
What NPCs will I need to detail? When you detail an 
NPC, you give them a hook, a motivation, a want, and 
a power. The hook is simply some visual or behavioral 
detail that will help them stick in the players’ memo -
ry. Reeking cigars, chrome-plated fingers, a habit of 
finishing every sentence with ’you think?’, or any oth -
er unique detail can help the players remember them 
when a name might slide off their recollections. These 
hooks also give you a hint for descriptive detail when 
you’re playing out an encounter with the PCs.
A motivation is simply that; what the NPC wants 
from life, what immediate goal or ambition they have. 
Often, this is related to the Problem; the NPC wants 
a particular outcome from the situation. Sometimes 
this is a broader life goal, like the desire for vast wealth, 
or a particular person’s love, or revenge on an enemy. 
A want is what they want specifically from the PCs. 
Usually this is something that helps them achieve their 
motivation, some assistance the PCs can give or action 
they can take that will further the NPC’s motivation. 
A power is what they can do to help or harm the PCs, 
whether that consists of giving vital info, exerting their 
influence for or against the PCs, or simply the threat 
of their physical violence against the party. An NPC’s 
power is why the PCs should care about their want.
Give the NPC combat statistics at this point if you 
think it likely they’re going to get in a fight. Remember 
that most people in the galaxy are normal human be-
ings with no unique combat prowess. Just because an 
NPC is the president of a megacorp doesn’t necessarily 
mean he’s got more than 1 hit die, especially if he’s 
led a life otherwise insulated from physical danger and 
threats to his life.
What default outcomes will you need to establish? 
In an unstable situation, it’s assumed that events will 
shake out a certain way if the PCs don’t get involved, 
or don’t try to redirect events a particular way. Take 
a moment to decide what’s going to happen in the ad-
venture if the players don’t change things. How will 
the situation resolve itself, and what will happen to the 
NPCs involved? If there’s a particular timeline to the 
adventure, when certain things will happen at certain 
times, note it down.
If the adventure is especially time-sensitive, make 
sure the PCs are given adequate warning about it. 
While the party might reasonably be expected to under-
stand that a tribal assault on a fortified desert commu-
nity isn’t going to continue forever, if the town is going 
to collapse in three hours then they need to know that 
every minute counts. Let NPCs warn them of the dwin-
dling resistance, let the enemies make visible progress 
toward success, and otherwise ensure that the natural 
warnings inherent in the situation are properly passed 
on to the players. They can’t realize how serious a situa-
tion is if the GM won’t tell them what their PCs can see.
What are the rewards to dealing with the Problem?  
You need to figure out what exactly the PCs are sup -
posed to be getting out of their efforts. If they’re plun-
dering an alien treasure-house, what exactly are they 
going to find there? If they save the desert community, 
what kind of help or reward do they receive? Is there 
some way that solving this Problem will advance a PC’s 
personal goals? Sometimes the reward of a situation is 
simply avoiding some terrible outcome, but too many 
of these charity jobs or self-defense adventures can 
leave the players feeling like chumps.
Determining the rewards in experience points, 
cash, or plunder can be delicate, so there’s a separate 
section in this chapter devoted to helping you do just 
that. Your choice will depend largely on how quickly 
you want the PCs to advance in personal power and 
how plausible it is that a given situation might offer a 
considerable reward.
Lastly, how will the PCs get involved? You’ve got a 
Person to hook them in, or the Problem itself is at -
tractive to the PCs, but how exactly are you going to 
connect the players to the adventure? Figure out the 
details of how you’re going to introduce the adven -
ture to the players and take note of the information, 
resources, and situation they’ll encounter when they 
step into the scenario.
Polish It Up
You’re almost finished with your adventure. All you 
need to do now is put yourself in your party’s shoes 
and think about how they’re likely to experience the 
adventure. You know your players better than any 
author could, so you know the ways they’re likely to 
react to NPCs, how they like to deal with problems, 
and what sort of things make them sympathetic or an-
gry. Don’t worry about some platonic Ideal Adventurer 
when you’re doing a mental walkthrough of the adven-
ture. Worry about the people you know are going to 
be playing this.
If you’ve created a sandbox-style adventure with 
the steps above, there won’t be any written-out “path” 
through the adventure. You’ll have a situation, some 
NPCs, and the resources you need to handle the players 
interacting with that situation. Maybe they’ll resolve 
it to their liking, and maybe they’ll end the session by 
booking a fast ship offplanet with a furious mob at their 
heels. Your only concern at this stage is making sure 
the adventure is logical, approachable, and engaging.
Is the adventure logical? If your adventure is con-
tradicting facts that have already been established about 
the world, the players are going to want to see a good 
reason for it. If they break into a slum warehouse to 
find it full of elite special-ops combatants, they’re going 
to want a very good explanation for such a seeming -
ly-irrational encounter. They don’t have to see every 
explanation or understand every dramatic deviation 
from reasonable expectations, but you should know 
these reasons, and the players should be confident that 
the reasons exist.
If you design an adventure by “story logic”, where 
the most important thing is maintaining a genre feel 
===== PAGE 181 =====
adventure Creation •1 77 
and good adventure pacing, the players are going to 
react in story-logical ways. When presented with an 
obstacle, they’re going to assume that their heroes are 
expected to have a reasonable chance to overcome 
that obstacle. When faced with a dangerous combat 
foe, they’re going to assume the enemy is at least the -
oretically beatable by the group, and when encounter -
ing a seemingly-invincible challenge, they’re going to 
look around for the right story levers to pull to make 
it somewhat more vincible. This style of running a 
game is perfectly valid, and it is indeed preferable for 
groups that want to maintain a certain genre feel, but 
it’s not usually how Stars Without Number adventures 
get made.
The default Stars Without Number assumption is 
that adventures operate on established setting logic. If 
something should be somewhere, it is, whether or not 
the PCs can hope to overcome it. If an ally is locked 
away in the bowels of a max-security prison, the PCs 
might simply not have any reasonable way to get them 
out unless they can change the situation through sup -
plemental adventures. When the PCs see a terrifyingly 
dangerous foe, that foe really is terrifyingly dangerous, 
and some PCs are almost certainly going to die if they 
decide to fight. The PCs have no cosmic authorial pro-
tection, and if they put themselves in no-win situations, 
they are going to lose.
With that in mind, look at your adventure and 
make sure it is not the sort of challenge or situation 
that would only be essayed by someone convinced that 
they are the first-book protagonist of a sci-fi trilogy. 
Don’t expect the PCs to do unreasonable things or face 
ridiculous obstacles just because they’re part of the ad-
venture. A canny player group will make a point of 
avoiding unjustified perils and staying well clear of un-
beatable difficulties. They won’t bite on your adventure 
if it seems a fast-track journey to an unmarked grave.
Is the adventure approachable? This has to do with 
your hook and the overall appeal of the situation. What 
is it about this situation that’s going to pique player 
interest? Knowing what you know about your players, 
is this the sort of thing they’re going to jump into? Even 
if you’re confident that the players will want to get in-
volved, you need to make sure they have a clear way 
into the situation. If it’s a roil of political intrigue, give 
them somebody to contact. If it’s a mysterious alien 
ruin, give them a map to it.
It’s not your job to develop a clear route through 
the adventure, a step-by-step sequence of events that 
can predictably lead to success. It is, however, your job 
to give the PCs a way to get involved in the situation. 
If you can’t see an obvious “first step” to the adventure, 
then it’s unlikely your players will be able to see one.
Is the adventure engaging? An adventure which 
is about something fundamentally uninteresting to the 
players is just not going to hold their attention. Good 
sports will try to get through it simply because it’s what 
you created for them, but other players will start play -
ing with their phones, talking about extraneous mat -
ters, or just doing something else in-game. Even if the 
PCs have a logical reason to care about the adventure, 
if the players are not invested, they aren’t going to have 
a very good time.
To build engagement, use elements your players 
love and elements your players hate. What do your 
players really like? What kind of NPCs, situations, and 
activities do they really enjoy? Don’t worry about ab-
stract players, just think about the specific people you 
are playing with. Conversely, what kind of villains do 
they absolutely despise? What sort of evildoing gets 
them fired up with righteous wrath? It’s important 
not to push things into gratuitous grimdark, but if you 
have some players who really hate slavers, then that’s 
a good cue to make beating down slavers an element 
in an adventure.
Once you’ve polished up the adventure, done a 
mental walk-through of events, and ensured that it is 
logical, approachable, and engaging, then you’re ready 
to play.
Creating Filler Adventures
Sometimes a GM gets caught flat-footed by the players. 
They do something or choose a goal that the GM is 
totally unprepared to manage. A GM is well within 
their rights to call a pause and explain to the players 
that they’re just not ready to handle that yet, and if the 
players want to do it, they can do it next session, after 
the GM has had time to prep something for it.
Other times, however, the GM will just throw in 
a quick filler adventure. These are adventures built ex-
pressly for running when the GM is caught by surprise 
or runs out of prepared content for the evening. Filler 
adventures are built much like any other adventure, but 
their priorities are different. Filler adventures should 
be insistent, short, and simple.
The adventure needs to be insistent; it needs to 
present a situation that the PCs absolutely must deal 
with right this minute. A terrorist attack, a criminal 
stealing a PC macguffin, a friend frantically calling for 
help… the adventure needs to grab the PCs and distract 
them from whatever it was they were trying to do.
Even so, the adventure should be short. A filler 
adventure shouldn’t take longer to complete than it 
takes for you to come up with a good response to the 
players’ initial goal. You just need to keep the players 
entertained long enough for you to figure out what 
you’re going to do, so a filler adventure shouldn’t eat 
up more than a session at most.
Lastly, the adventure should be simple. Don’t burn 
yourself out on complex entanglements and relations 
to the existing adventure. If you can come up with a 
good tie-in quickly, great, but the ideal filler adventure 
is general enough to slot in almost anywhere.
Unused bits and pieces of your regular adventures 
can be used as filler components. Don’t waste your 
work; if the PCs haven’t seen it, save it for later use.
===== PAGE 182 =====
1 78• adventure reWardS
adVenTure reWards
Player characters all have their own reasons for seeking 
adventure in the trackless void, but pragmatic rewards 
of wealth, power, and influence tend to be popular. 
When designing your adventures, how should you ap-
portion rewards, whether in experience points, pretech 
artifacts, or credits?
Rewarding Credits
The first thing to understand about the credit econo -
my in your campaign is that “too much money” is not 
a significant problem to have. Unlike many types of 
games, there’s really nothing the PCs can do with large 
amounts of money that will allow them to drastical -
ly improve their own personal power. They can hire 
minions, they can buy starships, they can get cyberware, 
and they can use their wealth as a bludgeon of influence, 
but at the end of the day they still basically have the 
same character sheet as before.
In the same vein, in a sandbox campaign there is 
no storyline to disrupt. If the PCs suddenly luck into 
a stellar tyrant’s ransom, then the campaign is about 
what they do with the money. Maybe it lets them ca -
sually crush the problems they used to have, but now 
they’ve got an entirely new set of concerns befitting 
their newfound wealth. Unless the PCs simply decide 
to stop adventuring after a lucky strike, their future 
campaign sessions will simply be flavored with great 
wealth and the problems and possibilities that come 
along with it.
So don’t worry about “keeping the PCs hungry”. 
Just let them acquire the logical amount of money that 
their deeds and situation would earn them. If they do 
a significant favor for a megacorp CEO, they should be 
earning a lot more than they’d get from the heartfelt 
gratitude of a lostworlder peasant whose life they saved.
With that in mind, here’s an adjacent list of reason-
able credit amounts that can be applied to adventures. 
If the PCs do work for someone, they’ll get paid to the 
extent that they earned it and the patron can afford it. 
If they come across lost loot or valuable cargo, you can 
use these numbers to gauge what a “big haul” would be 
to most people in the setting.
Rewarding Ships and Major Items
Most groups are going to want to get their own starship 
relatively early on in the campaign. You might even 
have the acquisition of a beaten-up merchant ship be 
the result of the introductory adventure. While it’s 
certainly possible for a sci-fi campaign to spend most 
of its time on a single world or for PCs to hitch rides 
with allies and existing transport ships, most players 
are going to want to get their own set of thrusters.
The basic guideline for rewarding a ship or any 
other major piece of hardware is that it’s going to take 
at least one session of adventure to get it, assuming you 
think it’s reasonable to allow it in the first place. The 
PCs are going to have to come up with a plan or look 
for an opportunity to grab the thing they want if they 
don’t have the money to buy it outright.
You can use this principle when the PCs want 
anything, whether it’s a ship, a particular ally, a base 
of operations, or anything else that can’t reasonably 
buy. Make them adventure for it. You can give them 
suggestions and ideas, but it’s up to them to come up 
with a plan for getting their hands on what they want.
Once they’ve done that, all you need to do is make 
up an adventure revolving around their efforts, and 
you’ve got your evening’s entertainment. As always, 
you should be watchful for opportunities to make PC 
ambitions into easy adventure outlines.
Rewarding Experience Points
There are several different methods to award experi -
ence points. The one you choose will depend largely on 
the kind of campaign you want to run and the speed of 
advancement you want for the PCs.
The basic experience award for each member of 
a party is three points. This assumes a fairly fast rate 
of advancement, with PCs reaching second level after 
their first award. If you want a slower one, drop it to 
two points, or even one. All members of the group 
should get the same basic award unless you want PCs 
of different levels in your group.
When do you hand out this basic award? You have 
several different choices.
Use a session-based system. Hand out the award at 
the end of every gaming session, assuming the PCs 
were trying to accomplish something worthy of their 
Reward Type Amount
A lot of money to a slum dweller 50
Slum dweller’s maximum funds 100
A lot of money to an ordinary worker 500
Ordinary worker’s maximum funds 1,000
A lot of money to an affluent person 2,500
Affluent person’s maximum funds 5,000
A lot of money to a wealthy person 25,000
Wealthy person’s maximum funds 100,000
A lot of money to an oligarch 1 million
Oligarch’s available liquid funds 5 million
Moderately-skilled short contract work 20 / day
An illegal but not serious crime job 500
Serious but non-capital criminal job 1,000
Kill someone who isn’t very important 5,000
Kill a significant or well-guarded target 50,000
Kill a major government official 250,000
===== PAGE 183 =====
adventure reWardS •1 79 
skills. Parties that coast along without facing any real 
challenges might not receive the award.
Use a personal goal-based system. Have every PC list 
at least one long-term goal and one short-term goal. 
If they achieve a short-term goal during the session, 
give them a basic award. If they manage to succeed at 
a long-term goal, give them triple that amount of expe-
rience. Different characters can share the same goals if 
they wish, and it’s up to the GM to decide whether or 
not a particular goal is challenging enough to deserve 
a reward. PCs can pick new goals or change old ones 
at the end of each session.
Note that if you use this method different PCs will 
advance at different rates, depending on how often they 
reach their goals. This isn’t a problem if the group is 
fine with it, and if PCs work to make sure the party 
isn’t focusing too much on the goals of only a few mem-
bers. If you want to help encourage spreading the focus 
around, you can rule that no PC can get goal XP again 
until someone else in the group has achieved a goal.
Use a mission-based system. Have the group agree 
on a mission or goal at the end of each session or at the 
start of the campaign. When the group reaches that 
goal, they all get an experience award. They can choose 
to change their goal at the end of every session, or pick 
a new one if they’ve attained their original purpose. If 
they choose a particularly hard mission they might get 
an extra bonus, at the cost of a greater risk of failure.
Use a loot-based system. This sort of campaign 
doesn’t use experience points. Instead, it uses cash. 
Every PC needs to earn 5,000 credits of liquid funds 
in rewards or loot before reaching second level. Then 
they need to earn 10,000 more to reach third, 20,000 
more to reach fourth, and so on, with the new amount 
needed doubling at each level. Only wealth they’ve 
earned adventuring and converted into spendable cred-
its counts toward this amount. Once a PC gains a level, 
their running “score” is reset to zero, and even huge 
hauls can’t boost them more than one level at a time.
This experience method strongly incentivizes 
ruthless plundering, and might result in uneven ad -
vancement if the party doesn’t split their earnings even-
ly. It does make for a laser-focused game of freebooting 
avarice, however.
Use a spending-based system. This works the same 
way as the loot-based system, but the credits they earn 
only count if the PC spends them. Credits spent on per-
sonal equipment, cyberware, vehicles, or other directly 
useful items don’t count. Only credits “wasted” in rev-
elry, charity, supporting some NPC cause, building a 
power base, or otherwise interacting with the game 
world count toward the PC’s advancement.
This, too, can result in a party with PCs of vary -
ing character level over time, as some choose to buy 
hardware and others elect to “waste” the money. It does 
encourage a great deal of engagement, however.
===== PAGE 184 =====
1 80• ProblemS
CreaTIng Problems
Every Problem boils down to a fundamental conflict. A 
person wants something and they can’t have it, or they 
don’t want something and are being forced to accept 
it, or they have something and it’s being threatened, or 
they want something and someone else wants it too. At 
the bottom of every Problem there’s a conflict the PCs 
can engage. These tables on these two pages provide 
some cues for generating Problems for your adventures.
First, roll 1d8, 1d10, and 1d10 on the Conflict 
Type table on the opposite page. The first roll gives 
you an idea of the general type of conflict at the bottom 
of the adventure. It might be a matter of money, old 
grudges, a natural catastrophe, ethnic struggles, or one 
of several other root causes. You can stop at this point 
if the cue is sufficiently inspirational.
Otherwise, the next roll gives you the overall situ-
ation of the conflict. This is the backdrop to the adven-
ture, and while the PCs may not be able to resolve the 
entire conflict, they should be able to make a difference 
in this particular skirmish. You can take this general 
context and decide on a specific event or situation that’s 
causing the conflict at the heart of the Problem.
If further inspiration is needed, the third roll gives 
you a specific focus for the Problem. Something is hap-
pening, and there are at least two sides involved; one 
that is in favor of what is happening, and one that is 
opposed. Just put forces on both sides of the focus and 
you’ll have your starting Problem.
Some Problems have the PCs on one of the sides. 
If “Money was stolen from someone” and “The PCs are 
owed it”, then the PCs themselves will have a powerful 
incentive to involve themselves in the conflict. Other 
Problems only have people on one side; if there’s a cat-
astrophic natural disaster, the disaster itself is unlikely 
to have motivations or goals, while the hapless victims 
doubtless are struggling to survive.
To add further decoration to the circumstances, 
you can roll on the tables below. The Restraint table 
gives you a reason why the conflict hasn’t boiled over 
yet, and why the PCs might be a wildcard that can re-
solve the problem at hand. Some Problems can keep 
a long time with a sufficiently stern Restraint, which 
makes them convenient when you need to make filler 
adventures that can stay in storage until you need them.
The Twist table gives you a turn you can add to 
the Problem, something to complicate the situation and 
shake up easy assumptions about how it will play out.
At all times, you should be looking for chances to 
insert elements you’ve already created for this world. 
Use Enemies for antagonists, Friends for allies, and 
slip in Complications when you need additional twists. 
GMing is tough enough without making extra work.
d20 The Restraint The Twist
1 The government is cracking down on the conflict There’s a very sharp time limit for any resolution
2 One side seems invincibly stronger to the other The sympathetic side is actually a bunch of bastards
3 Both sides have “doomsday” info or devices There’s an easy but very repugnant solution to hand
4 A prior conflict ended horribly for both of them PC success means a big benefit to a hostile group
5 Foreign participants are keeping things tamped The real bone of contention is hidden from most
6 Elements of both sides seek accommodation A sympathetic figure’s on an unsympathetic side
7 The conflict is only viable in a narrow location There’s a profitable chance for PCs to turn traitor
8 Catastrophic cost of losing a direct showdown The “winner” will actually get in terrible trouble
9 Each thinks they’ll win without further exertion There’s a very appealing third party in the mix
10 They expect a better opening to appear soon The PCs could really profit off the focus of the strife
11 Former ties of friendship or family restrain them The PCs are mistaken for an involved group
12 Religious principles are constraining them Somebody plans on screwing over the PCs
13 One side’s still licking their wounds after a failure Both sides think the PCs are working for them
14 They’re building up force to make sure they win A side wants to use the PCs as a distraction for foes
15 Their cultural context makes open struggle hard The PCs’ main contact is mistrusted by their allies
16 They expect an outside power to hand them a win If the other side can’t get it, they’ll destroy it
17 They’re still searching for a way to get at their goal The focus isn’t nearly as valuable as both sides think
18 One side mistakenly thinks they’ve already won The focus somehow has its own will and goals
19 A side is busy integrating a recent success Victory will drastically change one of the sides
20 An outside power threatens both sides Actually, there is no twist. It’s all exactly as it seems.
===== PAGE 185 =====
ProblemS •1 81 
d8 Conflict Type d10 Overall Situation d10 Specific Focus
1 Money 1-2 Money is owed to a ruthless creditor 1-2 Organized crime wants it
3-4 Money was stolen from someone 3-4 Corrupt officials want it
5-6 A sudden profit opportunity arises 5-6 A sympathetic NPC needs it
7-8 There’s a hidden stash of wealth 7-8 The PCs are owed it
9-0 Money is offered from an evil source 9-0 It will disappear very soon
2 Revenge 1-2 Someone was murdered 1-2 It was wholly justified
3-4 Someone was stripped of rank 3-4 The wrong person is targeted
5-6 Someone lost all their wealth 5-6 The reaction is excessive
7-8 Someone lost someone’s love 7-8 The PCs are somehow blamed
9-0 Someone was framed for a crime 9-0 Both sides were wronged
3 Power 1-2 An influential political leader 1-2 They’ve betrayed their own
3-4 A stern community elder 3-4 Someone’s gunning for them
5-6 A ruling patriarch of a large family 5-6 They made a terrible choice
7-8 A star expert in a particular industry 7-8 They usurped their position
9-0 A criminal boss or outcast leader 9-0 They’re oppressing their own
4 Natural Danger 1-2 A cyclical planetary phenomenon 1-2 Anti-helpful bureaucrats
3-4 A sudden natural disaster 3-4 Religious zealots panic
5-6 Sudden loss of vital infrastructure 5-6 Bandits and looters strike
7-8 Catastrophe from outside meddling 7-8 The government hushes it up
9-0 Formerly-unknown planetary peril 9-0 There’s money in exploiting it
5 Religion 1-2 Sects that hate each other bitterly 1-2 Charismatic new leader
3-4 Zealot reformers forcing new things 3-4 Mandatory state religion
5-6 Radical traditionalists fighting back 5-6 Heavy foreign influence
7-8 Ethnic religious divisions 7-8 Religious purging underway
9-0 Corrupt and decadent institutions 9-0 Fighting for holy ground
6 Ideology 1-2 A universally-despised fringe group 1-2 Terrorist attack
3-4 Terrorists with widespread support 3-4 Street rioting
5-6 A political party’s goon squads 5-6 Police state crackdown
7-8 Dead-end former regime supporters 7-8 Forced expulsions
9-0 Ruthless ascendant political group 9-0 Territory under hostile rule
7 Ethnicity 1-2 A traditionally subordinate group 1-2 Forced immigration
3-4 An ethnic group from offworld 3-4 Official ethnic ghettos
5-6 A dominant caste or ethnicity 5-6 Rigid separation of groups
7-8 An alien or transhuman group 7-8 Group statuses have changed
9-0 Two groups that hate each other 9-0 Rising ethnic violence
8 Resources 1-2 There’s a cache of illegal materials 1-2 Someone thinks they own it
3-4 A hidden strike of rare resources 3-4 The state is looking for it
5-6 Cargo has been abandoned as lost 5-6 It has its own protectors
7-8 Land ownership is disputed 7-8 Rights to it were stolen
9-0 A resource is desperately necessary 9-0 Offworlders want it badly
===== PAGE 186 =====
1 82• PeoPle
CreaTIng PeoPle
You’ll need People to help the PCs get involved in your 
adventure and to flesh out the personalities and im -
portant figures in the Problem. Not every NPC needs 
to be worked up fully, but it can be convenient to have 
a few spare People around to drop in when the players 
suddenly take an interest in a bit-player NPC you never 
expected they’d focus on.
To generate a Person, start with their motivation. 
This is what the Person wants out of life, their major 
focus and drive. The deals they offer and the actions 
they take should revolve around this motivation. Dif-
ferent people will go to different extremes to follow 
this motivation, so you shouldn’t feel obligated to make 
it a monomania for them, but it’s the basic driver of 
their actions.
Next, pick a want. This is the immediate thing the 
NPC thinks will most effectively advance their moti -
vation. If the latter is “Promote a friend or offspring’s 
career” and the want is “Burn down or destroy a partic-
ular structure”, then you simply have to figure out how 
burning down that place is going to advance the NPC’s 
daughter’s career. The want is what the NPC is most 
likely to desire the PCs to help them achieve.
Now determine their power. This is what the 
NPC can use to pay off the PCs or threaten them into 
compliance. If a Person hasn’t got any power to help 
or harm the party, the PCs aren’t going to have much 
motivation to care about their wants. Not every NPC 
will have much power, but they should all be able to do 
something to help or hinder the PCs.
Then you determine a hook, a visual or character 
quirk that will help you describe them during play and 
help the players remember who they are.
Lastly, if you want to make life a little easier for 
yourself, you can roll or pick an initial manner of 
approach and a default deal outcome for the Person. 
These additional tables help smooth out the handling 
of PC deals and negotiations with the NPC.
The initial manner is simply how the NPC will 
deal with the PCs during their initial meeting. Maybe 
they’ll be effusively appreciative of the party’s capabil-
ities, or maybe they’ll be full of thin-lipped disapproval, 
but their manner can give you some cues for playing 
out the NPC’s interactions with the party.
The default deal outcome can give you a cue as to 
how or if the NPC will keep any deal they make with 
the PCs. In some cases, you’ll already know whether 
or not the NPC will play fair with the party, either be-
cause you know they’re essentially trustworthy people 
or you know they’re double-dipped bastards. The table 
is convenient when you’re not quite sure if an NPC is 
as good as their word.
d20 Initial Manner Default Deal Outcome
1 Ingratiating and cloying They’ll screw the PCs over even at their own cost
2 Grim suspicion of the PCs or their backers They firmly intend to actively betray the PCs
3 Xenophilic interest in the novelty of the PCs They won’t keep the deal unless driven to it
4 Pragmatic and businesslike They plan to twist the deal to their own advantage
5 Romantically interested in one or more PCs They won’t keep their word unless it’s profitable
6 A slimy used-gravcar dealer’s approach They’ll flinch from paying up when the time comes
7 Wide-eyed awe at the PCs They mean to keep the deal, but are reluctant
8 Cool and superior attitude toward PC “hirelings” They’ll keep most of the deal, but not all of it
9 Benevolently patronizing toward outsiders They’ll keep the deal slowly and grudgingly
10 Sweaty-palmed need or desperation They’ll keep the deal but won’t go out of their way
11 Xenophobic mistrust of the PCs They’ll be reasonably punctual about the deal
12 Idealistic enthusiasm for a potentially shared cause They’ll want a further small favor to pay up on it
13 Somewhat intoxicated by recent indulgence They’ll keep the deal in a way that helps them
14 Smoothly persuasive and reasonable They’ll keep the deal if it’s still good for them
15 Visibly uncomfortable with the PCs They’ll offer a bonus for an additional favor
16 Grossly overconfident in PC abilities Trustworthy as long as the deal won’t hurt them
17 Somewhat frightened by the PCs Trustworthy, with the NPC following through
18 Deeply misunderstanding the PCs’ culture They’ll be very fair in keeping to their agreements
19 Extremely well-informed about the PCs’ past They’ll keep bargains even to their own cost
20 Distracted by their current situation Complete and righteous integrity to the bitter end
===== PAGE 187 =====
PeoPle •1 83 
d20 Their Motivation Their Want
1 An ambition for greater social status Bring them an exotic piece of tech
2 Greed for wealth and indulgent riches Convince someone to meet with the NPC
3 Protect a loved one who is somehow imperiled Kill a particular NPC
4 A sheer sadistic love of inflicting pain and suffering Kidnap or non-fatally eliminate a particular NPC
5 Hedonistic enjoyment of pleasing company Pay them a large amount of money
6 Searching out hidden knowledge or science Take a message to someone hard to reach
7 Establishing or promoting a cultural institution Acquire a tech component that’s hard to get
8 Avenging a grievous wrong to them or a loved one Find proof of a particular NPC’s malfeasance
9 Promoting their religion and living out their faith Locate a missing NPC
10 Winning the love of a particular person Bring someone to a destination via dangerous travel
11 Winning glory and fame in their profession Retrieve a lost or stolen object
12 Dodging an enemy who is pursuing them Defend someone from an impending attack
13 Driving out or killing an enemy group Burn down or destroy a particular structure
14 Deposing a rival to them in their line of work Explore a dangerous or remote location
15 Getting away from this world or society Steal something from a rival NPC or group
16 Promote a friend or offspring’s career or future Intimidate a rival into ceasing their course of action
17 Taking control of a property or piece of land Commit a minor crime to aid the NPC
18 Building a structure or a complex prototype tech Trick a rival into doing something
19 Perform or create their art to vast acclaim Rescue an NPC from a dire situation
20 Redeem themselves from a prior failure Force a person or group to leave an area
d20 Their Power Their Hook
1 They’re just really appealing and sympathetic to PCs A particular odd style of dress
2 They have considerable liquid funds An amputation or other maiming
3 They control the use of large amounts of violence Visible cyberware or prosthetics
4 They have a position of great social status Unusual hair, skin, or eye colors
5 They’re a good friend of an important local leader Scarring, either intentional or from old injuries
6 They have blackmail info on the PCs Tic-like overuse of a particular word or phrase
7 They have considerable legal influence here Specific unusual fragrance or cologne
8 They have tech the PCs might reasonably want Constant fiddling with a particular item
9 They can get the PCs into a place they want to go Visible signs of drug use
10 They know where significant wealth can be found Always seems to be in one particular mood
11 They have information about the PCs’ current goal Wears badges or marks of allegiance to a cause
12 An NPC the PCs need has implicit trust in them Extremely slow or fast pace of speech
13 The NPC can threaten someone the PCs like Wheezes, shakes, or other signs of infirmity
14 They control a business relevant to PC needs Constantly with a drink to hand
15 They have considerable criminal contacts Always complaining about a group or organization
16 They have pull with the local religion Paranoid, possibly for justifiable reasons
17 They know a great many corrupt politicians Insists on a particular location for all meetings
18 They can alert the PCs to an unexpected peril Communicates strictly through a third party
19 They’re able to push a goal the PCs currently have Abnormally obese, emaciated, tall, or short
20 They can get the PCs useful permits and rights Always found with henchmen or friends
===== PAGE 188 =====
1 84• PlaCeS
CreaTIng PlaCes
Places can be very simple to create or very complex. If 
a Place is only needed as a backdrop for events and you 
don’t expect the PCs to spend much time exploring it, 
you really don’t need anything more than a name and 
a few sentences of description for the table. If it’s to be 
an alien ruin, enemy base, or some other structure that 
the PCs are going to carefully interact with, you’ll need 
something more interesting.
For the former type of place, just pull an appropri-
ate Place from the world generation data you’ve already 
created. You can then give it some background activity 
from the table below. If it’s an urban, civilized sort of 
location, you can roll for a Civilized Ongoing to indi-
cate what’s happening there right now. If it’s a lost ruin, 
wilderness glade, or other wild place, roll or pick from 
the Wilderness Ongoings list.
If the PCs plan to investigate the place, you’ll want 
a Reward to determine what worthwhile thing the PCs 
might find there. In some cases, you’ll already know 
what the Reward should be; if the PCs are going into 
an alien ruin to dig out a lost macguffin, then the mac-
guffin itself will be the reward. You can still use the 
Reward table to create some secondary loot prospects 
in the place if you wish, the better to reward careful 
exploration and creative overcoming of the area’s in -
evitable hazards.
Those hazards can be derived from the opposite 
table. The first roll gives a general type of hazard that 
the PCs will have to face in an area or sub-area of the 
Place, while the specific examples and possible dangers 
provide more concrete suggestions.
You can apply these hazards to specific parts of 
the Place, or if the area is too small to sustain much 
mayhem, you might roll once and apply it generally to 
the entire location.
One of the easiest ways to quickly produce an in-
teresting area to explore is to go online and loot the 
web for old-school-style fantasy adventure modules. 
In many cases, the maps and floor plans can be stolen 
outright, while the room contents can be reskinned 
with suitably sci-fi flavor. Most of these old adventures 
use game mechanics that are similar to those used by 
Stars Without Number, such as hit points, Armor Class-
es, damage rolls, and gold piece values that can easily 
be converted to credits. If you mix and match these 
components, using pieces from multiple adventures to 
stitch together what you need, even those players who 
might have experienced the original adventure won’t 
be able to recognize your handiwork.
This principle of constructive looting is important 
to any sandbox GM. Save creative energy for where it 
counts. Everywhere else, plunder without shame.
d20 Reward Civilized Ongoings Wilderness Ongoings
1 Large cache of credits Local festival going on Bandits have moved in
2 Precious cultural artifact Angry street protests Flooding swept through
3 Vital data on the party’s goal Minor fire or other disorder Part of it has collapsed
4 Missing or kidnapped VIP Merchants and peddlers active Refugees are hiding here
5 Advanced pretech artifact Tourists from another country Dangerous animals lair here
6 Key to some guarded location Building repair or maintenance A rebel cell uses it for a base
7 Ancient treasure object Recent vehicle crash Smugglers have landed here
8 Recently-stolen goods Public art performance Foreign agents meet here
9 High-tech robotic servitor Angry traffic jam A hermit has taken up residence
10 Token item of ruling legitimacy Missionaries for a local religion A toxic plant is growing wild
11 Juicy blackmail material Loud advertising campaign An artist seeks inspiration here
12 History-rewriting evidence Memorial service ongoing An ancient structure was dug out
13 Alien artifact of great power Road work halting traffic The weather has turned savage
14 Precious megacorp data files Power outage in the area A vehicle crashed nearby
15 Map to some valuable thing Police chasing criminals Some locals are badly lost
16 Forbidden but precious drug Annoying drunks being loud Religious pilgrims come here
17 Legal title to important land Beggars seeking alms Locals fight over control of it
18 Awful secret of local government Constructing a new building Nature threatens to wipe it out
19 Cache of precious goods Local thugs swaggering around An old shrine was raised here
20 Stock of valuable weaponry Aerial light display A shell of a building remains
===== PAGE 189 =====
PlaCeS •1 85 
d8 Hazard d10 Specific Example d10 Possible Danger
1 Social 1-2 An explosively temperamental VIP 1-2 An allied NPC breaks ties
3-4 An unknown but critical social taboo 3-4 An enemy is alerted to them
5-6 A case of mistaken identity 5-6 A new enemy is made
7-8 An expectation for specific PC action 7-8 Cads think the PCs are allies
9-0 A frame job hung on the PCs 9-0 An opportunity is lost
2 Legal 1-2 A regulation unknown to the PCs 1-2 Substantial monetary fine
3-4 A tax or confiscation 3-4 Imprisonment for the party
5-6 Vital gear is prohibited here 5-6 Confiscation of possessions
7-8 Lawsuit from an aggrieved NPC 7-8 Deportation from the place
9-0 A state agent conscripts PC help 9-0 Loss of rights and protections
3 Environmental 1-2 Heavy background radiation 1-2 Catch a lingering disease
3-4 A planetary sickness foreigners get 3-4 Suffer bodily harm
5-6 Strong or weak local gravity 5-6 Take a penalty on rolls
7-8 Gear-eating microbial life 7-8 Lose some equipment
9-0 Unpredictable psychic power field 9-0 Psychic abilities are altered
4 Trap 1-2 Alarm system attached to a trap 1-2 Something set on fire
3-4 Snare left for local animals 3-4 Guards are summoned
5-6 Hermit’s self-defense measure 5-6 Fall to a new area
7-8 Long-dead builder’s trapsmithing 7-8 Equipment is damaged
9-0 New occupant’s defensive trap 9-0 Subject is injured
5 Animal 1-2 Dangerous local swarm vermin 1-2 They have a ranged attack
3-4 A big predator lair 3-4 They’re venomous
5-6 Pack hunters haunt the area 5-6 Dangerously coordinated foe
7-8 Flying threats pounce here 7-8 Killing them inflicts a fine
9-0 Monstrous beast sleeps or is torpid 9-0 Their deaths cause an effect
6 Sentient 1-2 A group hostile to intruders 1-2 Immediate combat
3-4 Trickster thieves and con-men 3-4 Treacherous feigned friend
5-6 Hostile expert-system robots 5-6 Lead the PCs into a trap
7-8 Secrecy-loving rebels or criminals 7-8 Demand payment or loot
9-0 Another area-clearing group 9-0 Activate other area defenses
7 Decay 1-2 Crumbling floor or ceiling 1-2 Ruptures to release a peril
3-4 Waste or heating tubes rupture 3-4 Toxic or radioactive debris
5-6 Dangerous standing liquid 5-6 Explosive decompression
7-8 Maintenance robots gone haywire 7-8 Invisible or slow-acting toxin
9-0 Power plant is unstable 9-0 Fires or explosions
8 PC-induced 1-2 Activating a system causes a disaster 1-2 Horrible vermin are admitted
3-4 Catastrophic plan proposed by NPCs 3-4 Local system goes berserk
5-6 Removing loot triggers defenses 5-6 Something ruptures violently
7-8 Handling an object ruins it 7-8 Ancient defenses awaken
9-0 Leaving a thing open brings calamity 9-0 The PC’s goal is imperiled
===== PAGE 190 =====
1 86• adventure SeedS
adVenTure seeds
The hundred ideas that follow are basic outlines for 
various adventures. Just take the components you’ve 
rolled for a given planet, slot them in the spaces noted 
in the adventure seeds, and build out from there to 
create an evening’s entertainment.
If you want something more complicated than 
these basic seeds provide, you can string several of 
them together, gluing them into a single perilous cir -
cumstance to occupy the heroes.
As a general rule of thumb, a single seed should 
occupy the group for a single session’s worth of adven-
ture. If you need to create more content than that, you 
can scale events by adding additional complications or 
breaking the adventure up into several additional tasks 
or obstacles that must be overcome before the PCs can 
successfully resolve it.
1. An Enemy seeks to rob a Friend of some precious 
Thing that he has desired for some time.
2. A Thing has been discovered on property owned 
by a Friend, but a Complication risks its destruc -
tion.
3. A Complication suddenly hits the party while 
they’re out doing some innocuous activity.
4. The players unwittingly offend or injure an Enemy, 
incurring his or her wrath. A Friend offers help in 
escaping the consequences.
5. Rumor speaks of the discovery of a precious Thing 
in a distant Place. The players must get to it before 
an Enemy does.
6. An Enemy has connections with offworld pirates 
or slavers, and a Friend has been captured by them.
7. A Place has been seized by violent revolutionaries 
or rebels, and a Friend is being held hostage by 
them.
8. A Friend is in love with someone forbidden by so-
cial convention, and the two of them need help 
eloping.
9. An Enemy wields tyrannical power over a Friend, 
relying on the bribery of corrupt local officials to 
escape consequences.
10. A Friend has been lost in hostile wilderness, and 
the party must reach a Place to rescue them in the 
teeth of a dangerous Complication.
11. An Enemy has committed a grave offense against a 
PC or their family sometime in the past. A Friend 
shows the party a weakness in the Enemy’s defens-
es.
12. The party is suddenly caught in a conflict between 
two warring families or political parties.
13. The party is framed for a crime by an Enemy, and 
must reach the sanctuary of a Place before they can 
regroup and find the Thing that will prove their 
innocence and their Enemy’s perfidy.
14. A Friend is threatened by a tragedy of sickness, le-
gal calamity, or public humiliation, and the only 
one that seems able to save them is an Enemy.
15. A natural disaster or similar Complication strikes 
a Place while the party is present, causing great 
loss of life and property unless the party is able to 
immediately respond to the injured and trapped.
16. A Friend with a young business has struck a cache 
of pretech, valuable minerals, or precious salvage. 
He needs the party to help him reach the Place 
where the valuables are.
17. An oppressed segment of society starts a sudden 
revolt in the Place the party is occupying. An En-
emy simply lumps the party in with the rebels and 
tries to put the revolt down with force. A Friend 
offers them a way to either help the rebels or clear 
their names.
18. A vulnerable Friend has been targeted for abduc -
tion, and has need of guards. A sudden Complica -
tion makes guarding them from the Enemy seeking 
their kidnapping much more difficult. If the Friend 
is snatched, they must rescue them from a Place.
19. A mysterious Place offers the promise of some 
precious Thing, but access is very dangerous due 
to wildlife, hostile locals, or a dangerous environ -
ment.
20. An Enemy and a Friend both have legal claim on 
a Thing, and seek to undermine each other’s case. 
The Enemy is willing to do murder if he thinks he 
can get away with it.
21. An Enemy seeks the death of his brother, a Friend, 
by arranging the failure of his grav flyer or shut -
tlecraft in dangerous terrain while the party is co -
incidentally aboard. The party must survive the 
environment and bring proof of the crime out 
with them.
22. A Friend seeks to slip word to a lover, one who is 
also being courted by the Friend’s brother, who 
is an Enemy. A Complication threatens to cause 
death or disgrace to the lover unless they either 
accept the Enemy’s suit or are helped by the party.
23. An Enemy is convinced that one of the party has 
committed adultery with their flirtatious spouse. 
He means to lure them to a Place, trap them, and 
have them killed by the dangers there.
24. An Enemy has been driven insane by exotic rec -
reational drugs or excessive psionic torching. He 
fixes on a PC as being his mortal nemesis, and 
plots elaborate deaths, attempting to conceal his 
involvement amid Complications.
25. A Friend has stolen a precious Thing from an En-
emy and fled into a dangerous, inaccessible Place. 
The party must rescue them, and decide what to do 
with the Thing and the outraged Enemy.
===== PAGE 191 =====
adventure SeedS •1 87 
26. An Enemy has realized that their brother or sister 
has engaged in a socially unacceptable affair with 
a Friend, and means to kill both of them unless 
stopped by the party.
27. A Friend has accidentally caused the death of a 
family member, and wants the party to help him 
hide the body or fake an accidental death before 
his family realizes what has happened. A Compli-
cation suddenly makes the task more difficult.
28. A Friend is a follower of a zealous ideologue who 
plans to make a violent demonstration of the 
righteousness of his cause, causing a social Com -
plication. The Friend will surely be killed in the 
aftermath if not rescued or protected by the party.
29. A Friend’s sibling is to be placed in a dangerous 
situation they’ve got no chance of surviving. The 
Friend takes their place at the last moment, and 
will almost certainly die unless the party aids them.
30. Suicide bombers detonate an explosive, chemical, 
or biological weapon in a Place occupied by the 
party where a precious Thing is stored The PCs 
must escape before the Place collapses on top of 
them, navigating throngs of terrified people in the 
process and saving the Thing if possible.
31. An Enemy who controls landing permits, oxygen 
rations, or some other important resource has a 
prejudice against one or more of the party mem-
bers. He demands that they bring him a Thing 
from a dangerous Place before he’ll give them the 
goods.
32. A Friend in a loveless marriage to an Enemy seeks 
escape to be with their beloved, and contacts the 
party to snatch them from their spouse’s guards at 
a prearranged Place.
33. A Friend seeks to elope with their lover, and con-
tacts the party to help them meet their paramour 
at a remote, dangerous Place. On arrival, they find 
that the lover is secretly an Enemy desirous of their 
removal and merely lured them to the place to 
meet their doom.
34. The party receives or finds a Thing which proves 
the crimes of an Enemy- yet a Friend was complicit 
in the crimes, and will be punished as well if the 
authorities are involved. And the Enemy will stop 
at nothing to get the item back.
35. A Friend needs to get to a Place on time in order to 
complete a business contract, but an Enemy means 
to delay and hinder them until it’s too late, induc-
ing Complications to the trip.
36. A locked pretech stasis pod has been discovered by 
a Friend, along with directions to the hidden key -
code that will open it. The Place where the keycode 
is hidden is now owned by an Enemy.
37. A fierce schism has broken out in the local majority 
religion, and an Enemy is making a play to take 
control of the local hierarchy. A Friend is on the 
side that will lose badly if the Enemy succeeds, and 
needs a Thing to prove the other group’s error.
38. A former Enemy has been given reason to repent 
his treatment of a Friend, and secretly commis -
sions them to help the Friend overcome a Com -
plication. A different Enemy discovers the connec-
tion, and tries to paint the PCs as double agents.
39. An alien or a human with extremely peculiar spiri-
tual beliefs seeks to visit a Place for their own rea-
sons. An Enemy of their own kind attempts to stop 
them before they can reach the Place, and reveal 
the Thing that was hidden there long ago.
40. A Friend’s sibling is an untrained psychic, and has 
been secretly using his or her powers to protect 
the Friend from an Enemy. The neural damage 
has finally overwhelmed their sanity, and they’ve 
now kidnapped the Friend to keep them safe. The 
Enemy is taking this opportunity to make sure 
the Friend “dies at the hands of their maddened 
sibling”.
41. A Friend who is a skilled precognitive has just re-
ceived a flash of an impending atrocity to be com-
mitted by an Enemy. He or she needs the party 
to help them steal the Thing that will prove the 
Enemy’s plans while dodging the assassins sent to 
eliminate the precog.
42. A Friend who is an exotic dancer is sought by an 
Enemy who won’t take no for an answer. The 
dancer is secretly a Perimeter agent attempting to 
infiltrate a Place to destroy maltech research, and 
plots to use the party to help get him or her into 
the facility under the pretext of striking at the En-
emy.
43. A young woman on an interplanetary tour needs 
the hire of local bodyguards. She turns out to be a 
trained and powerful combat psychic, but touch-
ingly naive about local dangers, causing a social 
Complication that threatens to get the whole 
group arrested.
44. A librarian Friend has discovered an antique data-
bank with the coordinates of a long-lost pretech 
cache hidden in a Place sacred to a long-vanished 
religion. The librarian is totally unsuited for dan -
ger, but necessary to decipher the obscure religious 
iconography needed to unlock the cache. The 
cache is not the anticipated Thing, but something 
more dangerous to the finder.
45. A fragment of orbital debris clips a shuttle on the 
way in, and the spaceport is seriously damaged in 
the crash. The player’s ship or the only vessel ca -
pable of getting them off-planet will be destroyed 
unless the players can organize a response to the 
dangerous chemical fires and radioactives contam-
inating the port. A Friend is trapped somewhere 
in the control tower wreckage.
46. A Friend is allied with a reformist religious group 
that seeks to break the grip of the current, oppres-
sive hierarchy. The current hierarchs have a great 
deal of political support with the authorities, but 
the commoners resent them bitterly. The Friend 
===== PAGE 192 =====
1 88• adventure SeedS
seeks to secure a remote Place as a meeting-place 
for the theological rebels.
47. A microscopic black hole punctures an orbital sta -
tion or starship above the world. Its interaction 
with the station’s artificial grav generators has 
thrown everything out of whack, and the sta -
tion’s become a minefield of dangerously high or 
zero grav zones. It’s tearing itself apart, and it’s 
going to collapse soon. An Enemy seeks to escape 
aboard the last lifeboat and to Hell with everyone 
else. Meanwhile, a Friend is trying to save his engi-
neer daughter from the radioactive, grav-unstable 
engine rooms.
48. The planet has a sealed alien ruin, and an Ene -
my-led cult who worships the vanished builders. 
They’re convinced that they have the secret to 
opening and controlling the power inside the ru-
ins, but they’re only half-right. A Friend has found 
evidence that shows that they’ll only devastate the 
planet if they meddle with the alien power planet. 
The party has to get inside the ruins and shut down 
the engines before it’s too late. Little do they real-
ize that a few aliens survive inside, in a stasis field 
that will be broken by the ruin’s opening.
49. An Enemy and the group are suddenly trapped in 
a Place during an accident or Complication. They 
must work together to escape in time.
50. A telepathic Friend has discovered that an Enemy 
was responsible for a recent atrocity. Telepathic 
evidence is useless on this world, however, and if 
she’s discovered to have scanned his mind she’ll be 
lobotomized as a ’rogue psychic’. A Thing might 
be enough to prove his guilt, if the party can fig-
ure out how to get to it without revealing their 
Friend’s meddling.
51. A Friend is responsible for safeguarding a Thing- 
yet the Thing is suddenly proven to be a fake. The 
party must find the real object and the Enemy who 
stole it or else their Friend will be punished as the 
thief.
52. A Friend is bitten by a poisonous local animal 
while in a remote Place. The only antidote is back 
at civilization, yet a Complication threatens to de-
lay the group until it is too late.
53. A lethal plague has started among the residents of 
the town, but a Complication is keeping aid from 
reaching them. An Enemy is taking advantage of 
the panic to hawk a fake cure at ruinous prices, 
and a Friend is taken in by him. The Complication 
must be overcome before help can reach the town.
54. A radical political party has started to institute 
pogroms against “groups hostile to the people”. A 
Friend is among those groups, and needs to get out 
of town before an Enemy uses the riot as cover to 
settle old scores.
55. An Enemy has sold the party an expensive but 
worthlessly flawed piece of equipment before 
lighting out for the back country. He and his plun-
der are holed up at a remote Place.
56. A concert of offworld music is being held in town, 
and a Friend is slated to be the star performer. Re-
actionary elements led by an Enemy plot to ruin 
the “corrupting noise” with sabotage that risks 
getting performers killed. Meanwhile, a crowd 
of ignorant offworlder fans have landed and are 
infuriating the locals.
57. An Enemy is wanted on a neighboring world for 
some heinous act, and a Friend turns up as a boun-
ty hunter ready to bring him in alive. This world 
refuses to extradite him, so the capture and retriev-
al has to evade local law enforcement.
58. An unanticipated solar storm blocks communica -
tions and grounds the poorly-shielded grav vehicle 
that brought the group to this remote Place. Then 
people start turning up dead; the storm has awo-
ken a dangerous Enemy beast.
59. A Friend has discovered a partially-complete sche-
matic for an ancient pretech refinery unit that pro-
duces vast amounts of something precious on this 
world- water, oxygen, edible compounds, or the 
like. Several remote Places on the planet are indi-
cated as having the necessary pretech spare parts 
required to build the device. When finally assem -
bled, embedded self-modification software in the 
Thing modifies itself into a pretech combat bot. 
The salvage from it remains very valuable.
60. A Complication ensnares the party where they are 
in an annoying but seemingly ordinary event. In 
actuality, an Enemy is using it as cover to strike at 
a Friend or Thing that happens to be where the 
PCs are.
61. A Friend has a cranky, temperamental artificial 
heart installed, and the doctor who put it in is the 
only one who really understands how it works. 
The heart has recently started to stutter, but the 
doctor has vanished. An Enemy has snatched him 
to fit his elite assassins with very unsafe combat 
mods.
62. A local clinic is doing wonders in providing free 
health care to the poor. In truth, it’s a front for 
an offworld eugenics cult, with useful “specimens” 
kidnapped and shipped offworld while ’cremat -
ed remains’ are given to the family. A Friend is 
snatched by them, but the party knows they’d 
have never consented to cremation as the clinic 
staff claim.
63. Space pirates have cut a deal with an isolated 
backwoods settlement, off loading their plunder 
to merchants who meet them there. A Friend goes 
home to family after a long absence, but is kid -
napped or killed before they can bring back word 
of the dealings. Meanwhile, the party is entrusted 
with a valuable Thing that must be brought to the 
Friend quickly.
===== PAGE 193 =====
adventure SeedS •1 89 
64. A reclusive psychiatrist is offering treatment for 
violent mentally ill patients at a remote Place. His 
treatments seem to work, calming the subjects 
and returning them to rationality, though major 
memory loss is involved and some severe social 
clumsiness ensues. In actuality, he’s removed 
large portions of their brains to fit them with re-
mote-control units slaved to an AI in his labora -
tory. He intends to use them as drones to acquire 
more “subjects”, and eventual control of the town.
65. Vital medical supplies against an impending plague 
have been shipped in from offworld, but the spike 
drive craft that was due to deliver them misjumped, 
and has arrived in-system as a lifeless wreck trans-
mitting a blind distress signal. Whoever gets there 
first can hold the whole planet hostage, and an En-
emy means to do just that.
66. A Friend has spent a substantial portion of their 
wealth on an ultra-modern new domicile, and in-
vites the party to enjoy a weekend there. An En -
emy has hacked the house’s computer system to 
trap the inhabitants inside and use the automated 
fittings to kill them.
67. A mud slide, hurricane, earthquake, or other form 
of disaster strikes a remote settlement. The party 
is the closest group of responders, and must rescue 
the locals while dealing with the unearthed, mal-
functioning pretech Thing that threatens to cause 
an even greater calamity if not safely defused.
68. A Friend has found a lost pretech installation, and 
needs help to loot it. By planetary law, the contents 
belong to the government.
69. An Enemy mistakes the party for the kind of off-
worlders who will murder innocents for pay- as -
suming they aren’t that kind, at least. He’s sloppy 
with the contact and unwittingly identifies himself, 
letting the players know that a Friend will shortly 
die unless the Enemy is stopped.
70. A party member is identified as a prophesied savior 
for an oppressed faith or ethnicity. The believers 
obstinately refuse to believe any protestations to 
the contrary, and a cynical Enemy in government 
decides the PC must die simply to prevent the risk 
of uprising. An equally cynical Friend is deter -
mined to push the PC forward as a savior, because 
that’s what’s needed.
71. Alien beasts escape from a zoo and run wild 
through the spectators. The panicked owner offers 
large rewards for recapturing them live, but some 
of the beasts are quite dangerous.
72. A trained psychic is accused of going feral by an 
Enemy. The psychic had already suffered severe 
neural damage before being found for training, 
so brain scans cannot establish physical signs of 
madness. The psychic seems unstable, but not vi-
olent- at least, on short acquaintance. The psychic 
offers a psychic PC the secrets of a unique psychic 
technique if they help him flee.
73. A Thing is the token of rulership on this world, 
and it’s gone missing. If it’s not found rapidly, the 
existing ruler will be deposed. Evidence left at a 
Place suggests that an Enemy has it, but extralegal 
means are necessary to investigate fully.
74. Psychics are vanishing, including a Friend. They’re 
being kidnapped by an ostensibly-rogue govern -
ment researcher who is using them to research the 
lost psychic disciplines that helped enable pretech 
manufacturing, and they are being held at a remote 
Place. The snatcher is a small-time local Enemy 
with unnaturally ample resources.
75. A Friend desperately seeks to hide evidence of some 
past crime that will ruin his life should it come to 
light. An Enemy holds the Thing that proves his 
involvement, and blackmails him ruthlessly.
76. A courier mistakes the party for the wrong set of 
offworlders, and wordlessly deposits a Thing with 
them that implies something awful- med-frozen, 
child-sized human organs, for example, or a pri -
vate catalog of gengineered human slaves. The 
courier’s boss shortly realizes the error, and this 
Enemy tries to silence the PCs while preserving 
the Place where his evil is enacted.
77. A slowboat system freighter is taken over by En -
emy separatist terrorists at the same time as the 
planet’s space defenses are taken offline by internal 
terrorist attacks. The freighter is aimed straight at 
the starport, and will crash into it in hours if not 
stopped.
78. 
Alien artifacts on the planet’s surface start beaming 
signals into the system’s asteroid belt. The signals 
provoke a social Complication in panicked re -
sponse, and an Enemy seeks to use the confusion 
to take over. The actual effect of the signals might 
be harmless, or might summon a long-lost alien AI 
warship to scourge life from the world.
79. An alien ambassador Friend is targeted by xeno -
phobe Enemy assassins. Relations are so fragile 
that if the ambassador even realizes that humans 
are making a serious effort to kill him, the result 
may be war.
80. A new religion is being preached by a Friend on 
this planet. Existing faiths are not amused, and 
an Enemy among the hierarchy is provoking the 
people to persecute the new believers, hoping for 
things to get out of hand.
81. An Enemy was once the patron of a Friend until 
the latter was betrayed. Now the Friend wants re-
venge, and they think they have the information 
necessary to get past the Enemy’s defenses.
82. Vital life support or medical equipment has been 
sabotaged by offworlders or zealots, and must be 
repaired before time runs out. The only possible 
source of parts is at a Place, and the saboteurs can 
be expected to be working hard to get there and 
destroy them, too.
===== PAGE 194 =====
1 90• adventure SeedS
83. A Friend is importing offworld tech that threatens 
to completely replace the offerings of an Enemy 
businessman. The Enemy seeks to sabotage the 
friend’s stock, and thus ’prove’ its inferiority.
84. An Exchange diplomat is negotiating for the open-
ing of a branch of the interstellar bank on this 
world. An Enemy among the local banks wants to 
show the world as being ungovernably unstable, 
so provokes Complications and riots around the 
diplomat.
85. An Enemy is infuriated by the uppity presumption 
of an ambitious Friend of a lower social caste, and 
tries to pin a local Complication on the results of 
his unnatural rejection of his proper place.
86. A Friend is working for an offworld corporation 
to open a manufactory, and is ignoring local tradi-
tions that privilege certain social or ethnic groups, 
giving jobs to the most qualified workers instead. 
An angry Enemy seeks to sabotage the factory.
87. An offworld musician who was revered as little less 
than a god on his homeworld requires bodyguards. 
He immediately acquires Enemies on this world 
with his riotous ways, and his guards must keep 
him from getting arrested if they are to be paid.
88. Atmospheric disturbances, dust storms, or other 
particulate clouds suddenly blow into town, leav -
ing the settlement blind. An Enemy commits a 
murder during the darkness, and attempts to frame 
the players as convenient scapegoats.
89. An Enemy spikes the oxygen supply of an orbit -
al station or unbreathable-atmosphere hab dome 
with hallucinogens as cover for a theft. Most vic-
tims are merely confused and disoriented, but 
some become violent in their delusions. By chance, 
the party’s air supply was not contaminated.
90. By coincidence, one of the party members is wear-
ing clothing indicative of membership in a violent 
political group, and thus the party is treated in 
friendly fashion by a local Enemy for no obvious 
reason. The Enemy assumes that the party will go 
along with some vicious crime without complaint, 
and the group isn’t informed of what’s in the offing 
until they’re in deep.
91. A local ruler wishes outworlders to advise him of 
the quality of his execrable poetry- and is the sort 
to react very poorly to anything less that evidently 
sincere and fulsome praise. Failure to amuse the 
ruler results in the party being dumped in a dan -
gerous Place to “experience truly poetic solitude”.
92. A Friend among the locals is unreasonably con -
vinced that offworlder tech can repair anything, 
and has blithely promised a powerful local Ene -
my that the party can easily fix a damaged pretech 
Thing. The Enemy has invested in many expen -
sive spare parts, but the truly necessary pieces are 
kept in a still-dangerous pretech installation in a 
remote Place.
93. The party’s offworld comm gear picks up a chance 
transmission from the local government and au -
tomatically descrambles the primitive encryption 
key. The document is proof that an Enemy in gov-
ernment intends to commit an atrocity against a 
local village with a group of “deniable” renegades 
in order to steal a Thing kept in the village.
94. A Friend belongs to a persecuted faith, ethnicity, 
or social class, and appeals for the PCs to help a 
cell of rebels get offworld before the Enemy law 
enforcement finds them.
95. A part on the party’s ship or the only other trans-
port out has failed, and needs immediate replace-
ment. The only available part is held by an Enemy, 
who will only willingly relinquish it in exchange 
for a Thing held by an innocent Friend who will 
refuse to sell at any price.
96. Eugenics cultists are making gengineered slaves 
out of genetic material gathered at a local brothel. 
Some of the unnaturally tempting slaves are being 
slipped among the prostitutes as bait to infatuate 
powerful officials, while others are being sold un-
der the table to less scrupulous elites.
97. Evidence has been unearthed at a Place that sub -
stantial portions of the planet are actually owned 
by members of an oppressed and persecuted group. 
The local courts have no intention of recognizing 
the rights, but the codes with the ownership ev-
idence would allow someone to bypass a number 
of antique pretech defenses around the planetary 
governor’s palace. A Friend wants the codes to pass 
to his friends among the group’s rebels.
98. A crop smut threatens the planet’s agriculture, 
promising large-scale famine. A Friend finds ev -
idence that a secret government research station 
in the system’s asteroid belt was conducting ex -
periments in disease-resistant crop strains for the 
planet before the Silence struck and cut off com -
munication with the station. The existing govern-
ment considers it a wild goose chase, but the party 
might choose to help. The station has stasis-frozen 
samples of the crop sufficient to avert the famine, 
but it also has less pleasant relics….
99. A grasping Enemy in local government seizes the 
party’s ship for some trifling offense. The Enemy 
wants to end offworld trade, and is trying to scare 
other traders away. The starship is held within a 
military cordon, and the Enemy is confident that 
by the time other elements of the government 
countermand the order, the free traders will have 
been spooked off.
100. A seemingly useless trinket purchased by a PC 
turns out to be the security key to a lost pretech 
facility. It was sold by accident by a bungling and 
now-dead minion of a local Enemy, who is hot af-
ter the party to “reclaim” his property… preferably 
after the party defeats whatever automatic defens-
es and bots the facility might still support.
===== PAGE 195 =====
an examPle of adventure Creation •1 91 
an eXamPle of adVenTure CreaTIon
The GM has just started a new campaign, and he needs 
to brew up an initial adventure to pull the party to -
gether and get them accustomed to the sector he’s just 
created. He knows what planet the PCs are going to 
begin on and he knows he wants them to end up own-
ing a battered free merchant starship by the end of the 
session, but the rest is still up in the air.
He starts by deciding whether or not to use an ad-
venture seed. While he sees a few that might work, he 
decides instead to roll up this adventure from scratch.
The world he’s created is a planet known to its 
natives as Delaine, with the world tags “Alien Ruins” 
and “Xenophobes”. The Delainers have numerous un-
explored alien ruins on their world, but fear them as 
potential sources of catastrophe. They hate outsiders 
because the offworlders are constantly prodding at the 
ruins and trying to loot them, and care nothing for the 
disasters they might unleash on the locals.
The GM knows that his first batch of PCs are very 
unlikely to all be Delainers, so he decides that they were 
all passengers on a smuggler ship that tried to land on 
Delaine and loot one of the ruins. The Delainer defense 
grid spotted the ship and knocked it down, however, 
and the PCs were among the few survivors. Maybe the 
PCs were initially part of the smuggler crew, or may -
be they were just oblivious passengers. The GM will 
let each player decide what their PC’s role was during 
character creation.
The first step is to pick a Problem for the PCs to 
get involved in. On the face of it, the obvious Problem 
for the PCs is that they’re marooned on a hostile world 
and need to get off before the natives find them and 
either kill or imprison them.
The GM wants something a little more specific 
than this, however. He rolls some dice on the Conflict 
table, and comes up with “Ethnicity” for the Conflict, 
with “Two groups that hate each other” and “Official 
ethnic ghettos”. Given Delaine’s history, the GM de -
cides that any non-native Delainers present when the 
world shut down its contact with other planets were 
separated out into remote ethnic reservations, far away 
from the ruins. These “offworlders” have been here for 
generations but are despised by the native Delainers.
With that established, the GM decides that the 
PC’s ship was shot down near one of these reservations, 
and the bitter offworlders are interested in helping peo-
ple whom the Delainers hate. But who will the initial 
Person the PCs contact be?
The dice paint the picture of an offworlder mo -
tivated to redeem themselves from a prior failure, 
who wants to find proof of a rival NPC’s malfeasance, 
who knows where significant wealth is to be found, 
and wears a particularly odd style of dress. From this, 
the GM creates “the Captain”, a former ruin smuggler 
whose crew was gunned down while trying to loot an 
alien ruin. Only he survived, and his guilt is intense. 
He still wears a nautical captain’s hat, and is hiding out 
among the offworlders. He knows where he’s hidden 
his ship and can guide the PCs to it if they can make 
the dangerous overland journey.
The GM isn’t so certain about the Captain’s want, 
however. While something like that would make a 
good sideline for a longer adventure, he wants this 
initial adventuring session to be relatively short and 
straightforward. He replaces the want with the Cap -
tain’s desire for the PCs to get him and his young off-
worlder wife off the planet, bringing them to just about 
any place that isn’t on Delaine. He’s willing to give the 
PCs his ship if they just help him get away.
Why hasn’t the Captain snuck off with his young 
bride yet? To answer that question, the GM turns to 
the Places section and rolls up a hazard. The result is 
“Sentient”, which means that there’s an intelligent ene-
my between the Captain and the ship. The GM mulls 
over the possibilities for a while, and decides the Cap-
tain wasn’t the only survivor. His first mate made it out 
too, and blames the Captain. He’s gathered together a 
small band of offworlder rebels and is seeking to loot 
ruins and harm Delainers, because he can’t operate the 
ship without the Captain’s security codes and he’s not 
sufficiently talented to hack the locks himself.
At this point, the GM looks at the adventure and 
identifies the bits he needs to flesh out. He needs to 
detail the Captain, the first mate, the offworlder rebels, 
and the Delainer security chief who will seek to appre-
hend the PCs if they’re not sufficiently stealthy. All of 
these people will need combat stats. The Captain’s wife, 
the offworlder reservation locals, and other bit NPCs 
are unlikely to get into a fight, and don’t need stats.
The GM decides he doesn’t need a map for the 
offworlder reservation settlement, but he does need 
a map of the terrain between the settlement and the 
hidden ship. He downloads a suitable terrain map from 
the web for that. On the map, he plants a few Wilder-
ness Ongoings from the Places table that the PCs may 
or may not encounter depending on how they chart 
their course.
The last detail to flesh out is the first mate’s rebel 
camp, and how the PCs might get at the starship they’re 
guarding. The GM decides that it’s not reasonable for 
the first mate to have accumulated a vast number of 
minions, but there are too many for the PCs to com-
fortably engage. The PCs will have to think of some 
way to distract them, or possibly sic the Delainer secu-
rity chief on them before they can get to the ship. It’s 
not the GM’s job to hand them a solution, so they’ll 
have to puzzle it out on their own.
With that done, the starting adventure is ready. 
The GM might add some more details and fluff, but 
what he has is a playable start to a campaign.
===== PAGE 196 =====

===== PAGE 197 =====
XENOBESTIARY
A band of interstellar adventurers can expect to en -
counter a wide range of creatures in the course of their 
travels. Whether the hungry fauna of an uncharted 
planet or the trigger-happy gunmen of an alien organ 
smuggler, a GM needs to have the relevant statistics at 
hand to manage probable hostilities.
Handling Potential Combat
Before picking foes from this chapter, however, a GM 
should make sure that the enemies chosen and the 
perils generated are appropriate for the situation. This 
does not mean that the enemies have to be an “appro-
priate” combat challenge for the PC group, one that 
they have a reasonable chance of defeating. It means 
that they should be appropriate to the location and role 
they fill in the setting.
If there’s a stretch of wilderness adjacent to a hu -
man community, a party-eating hellbeast should not 
be lairing there without some notice by the locals. If 
such an unstoppable horror does exist secretly in the 
wilderness, the fact that it is hidden should be somehow 
explained or meaningful. NPCs notice hazards next 
door, and PCs who pay attention should hear about 
that danger before they end up walking into its cave.
In the same vein, if the PCs run into a bunch of 
street thugs, the hooligans should not be exhibiting 
Spartan discipline and crack military expertise unless 
the PCs have gone slumming on a planet of genetic 
super-soldiers. The goons might actually not be much 
of a combat threat at all, and dangerous only for the 
potential grudges the PCs could earn in executing them.
Lastly, don’t add combat encounters that are un -
avoidable. There are very few realistic situations where 
the only possible result is a gun battle. A group of trig-
ger-happy mercs might happen to be sitting directly on 
top of the party’s objective, but if there’s no way to lure 
them away or sneak past them– or worse, if you’re not 
prepared to allow the PCs to try to lure them away or 
sneak past them– then the players will learn not to try 
to solve problems with anything but a hot gun barrel.
Combat in Stars Without Number is dangerous. 
Every squeeze of a trigger risks killing a novice ad -
venturer, and even a veteran of countless heroic deeds 
can get mowed down in a hurry by a half-dozen goons 
with mag rifles. If your adventures funnel the PCs into 
near-unavoidable firefights or saber-toothed alien 
monsters, the PCs are going to suffer casualties. A cer-
tain degree of death can add spice and excitement to a 
game and help make player choices feel more meaning-
ful, but inevitable gory disembowelment in the third 
inescapable pirate brawl of the day is just tedious.
The Reaction Roll
One of the GM’s most important tools for managing 
encounters with NPCs is the reaction roll. Whenever 
the PCs first meet with a creature or NPC, the GM 
should roll 2d6 and consult the following table.
2d6 Reaction Result
2 Hostile, reacting as negatively as is plausible
3-5 Negative, unfriendly and unhelpful
6-8 Neutral, reacting predictably or warily
9-11 Positive, potentially cooperative with PCs
12 Friendly, helpful as is plausible to be
The result should be taken in context. If the PCs 
just happen to run into a pack of hab-complex gang -
ers, a positive result might simply mean the gangers 
think it’s a bad idea to interfere with the PCs. That 
same result when meeting a bored starport bureaucrat 
might mean she’s feeling magnanimous, and is willing 
to help the PCs accomplish their purpose. In general, 
low results make the situation more hostile than the 
predictable baseline, while high results make the NPC 
more friendly or cooperative than they might normally 
be under the circumstances.
Reaction rolls are important because they help a 
GM adjudicate a situation in a potentially surprising or 
interesting way. If the PCs are crossing a radioactive 
badland crawling with violent scavenger tribes, the 
GM might just reflexively assume that every scavenger 
band they encounter is immediately going to reach for 
their scrap-guns. A reaction roll is a cue for the GM 
to pause and think, and a friendly result can open up a 
situation with far more potential novelty than the sixth 
consecutive gun battle. Conversely, even if everything 
seems to suggest an NPC should be helpful and friendly 
toward the PCs, a negative result can get the GM think-
ing about potential reasons why the NPC is so hostile 
towards supposedly allied PCs.
An NPC or a group’s initial reaction is not the last 
word, of course. A silver-tongued PC might be able to 
talk them out of hostility or induce them to do the party 
a favor, and more pragmatic offers of money, favors, 
or incipient violence might also sway their attitudes. 
Such manipulation happens after the initial attitude is 
determined, however, and what exactly the PCs offer 
or threaten will usually depend on how the NPC is ini-
tially reacting to them.
===== PAGE 198 =====
1 94• humanity
humanITy
Humans are likely to form the great majority of the 
NPCs that the heroes encounter, whether as patrons, 
companions, or the targets of their guns. In many cases 
a GM won’t need to bother with combat statistics for an 
NPC. They might be so unmartial that they can present 
no serious threat to a party of hardened freebooters, or 
so distant that there’s no real chance that they’ll become 
engaged in combat. In others, however, it’s necessary to 
decide how much a particular NPC is worth in a fight.
The example human opponents here assume 
normal baseline humanity. Those who have received 
extensive cyberware, gengineering, psychic augmenta-
tion, or other exotic treatments may have abilities far 
in excess of their normal brethren, including unique 
powers and special abilities.
Degrees of Danger
Most human NPCs on advanced, civilized planets are 
of almost no use in combat. By societal training and 
personal inclination, they are almost incapable of re -
sponding to lethal threats with a quick, decisive reac-
tion. Citizens of less peaceful societies, where violence 
is a commonplace, will have more useful reactions 
to such hostilities. Men and women who have been 
hardened to combat by experience or training will also 
respond more effectively.
The combat statistics provided here cover the usu-
al range of human martial talent. At the bottom are 
those soft citizens of peaceful worlds and at the top 
are those engines of mortal ruin who are the most dan-
gerous men and women in the sector. Even more he -
roic appetites for slaughter can be found in those who 
have been altered by genetic engineering or advanced 
technical modifications, but such paragons of pain are 
special cases to be judged by the GM accordingly.
When assigning combat statistics to NPC, it’s im-
portant not to be influenced by the personal prowess of 
the PCs. If country estate is protected by ordinary secu-
rity guards, then the guards should be ordinary security 
guards, whether or not the party could reasonably hope 
to defeat a dozen such protectors in open combat. The 
universe does not scale to the PCs. If a party of un -
tested novices finds themselves facing a squad of elite 
killers, they should run. If those famously lethal killers 
encounter the PCs six levels later, their fame might get 
abbreviated in a hurry by the PCs’ grim new expertise.
This even-handedness is important in creating a 
plausible, functional world for the players to operate in. 
If they know that challenges will be scaled up or down 
to give them a “fair fight” then it hardly matters what 
challenges they choose to face. Planning to carefully 
avoid excess dangers and betting on overcoming more 
reasonable threats makes their choices meaningful in 
your game world, and encourages the players to engage 
carefully with the setting.
Using the Table
The table provided in this section gives you bench -
marks for some basic NPC types and then a selection 
of specific examples. When you’re creating your own 
NPCs, you can use the benchmarks to get an idea of 
where they should be, and the specific examples can be 
pulled during play when you’re in need of quick oppo-
nents to stock your adventures.
The table provides simplified combat statistics. 
NPCs don’t normally have foci, specific skill levels, 
attribute scores, or any of the other details that add 
complexity to PCs. Nor do they have classes or class 
abilities. Instead, simpler totals and summaries are used 
to account for these other factors. You can give NPCs 
class powers and foci if you wish, or even create an 
NPC as if they were a full-fledged PC, but that kind 
of detail and work is more than most NPCs are worth.
HD is the NPC’s hit dice. The overwhelming ma-
jority of NPCs have only one hit die. Only men and 
women with a history of surviving violence and deal-
ing with mortal peril should have more than one hit 
die. Just because an NPC is “important” doesn’t mean 
they have more hit dice. The CEO of an interstellar 
megacorp probably has one hit die, as does the pres -
ident of the planetary government. Conversely, the 
grizzled warrior-king of a lostworlder monarchy or a 
poison-wary bishop of a church where promotion is 
through mortality might have half a dozen hit dice. The 
most danger-hardened legends of a sector should have 
about ten hit dice, or more if they’ve been somehow 
altered by gengineering or advanced technology. An 
NPC’s hit points are rolled at 1d8 for each hit die.
AC is the NPC’s usual Armor Class. This will vary 
with the armor they’re wearing, and some NPCs might 
have an included +1 or +2 bonus if they’re especially 
dexterous, but the listed score reflects the armor they 
usually have on. By default, this is street armor that 
is not obvious to casual inspection. Some entries are 
marked “primitive”, meaning that their armor is ig -
nored by advanced weapons, while others are marked 
“combat”, meaning that they wear very obviously pro-
tective armor. Such NPCs might need to wear less ob-
vious gear in some social situations. A few of them are 
marked “powered”, meaning that the NPC normally 
has access to some kind of advanced power armor that 
renders them immune to primitive weapons. When 
creating your own NPCs, give them the armor that is 
appropriate to their role and situation.
Atk is the NPC’s attack bonus. For the sake of sim-
plicity, this includes any attribute modifiers, skill bonus, 
or other extra lethality that the NPC might have earned. 
For most NPCs, their attack bonus is equal to their hit 
dice. Martial NPCs might have an additional bonus on 
top of that, or even attack twice with each Main Action.
===== PAGE 199 =====
Psychics and Special Traits
When building NPCs with psychic powers or oth-
er special abilities, it’s usually not worth the effort 
of rolling them up like PCs. Just assign them a few 
abilities you think will matter during the game and 
give them a third of their hit dice in maximum 
Effort, rounded up.
In the same vein, gengineered humans or 
rare virtuosos might have abilities akin to Foci or 
unique powers. Just assign them as fits the situa -
tion, and don’t worry about making them like PCs.
humanity •1 95 
General NPC Type HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves
Peaceful Human 1 10 +0 Unarmed 10m 6 +1 15+
Martial Human 1 10 +1 By weapon 10m 8 +1 15+
Veteran Fighter 2 14 +2 By weapon +1 10m 9 +1 14+
Elite Fighter 3 16 (combat) +4 By weapon +1 10m 10 +2 14+
Heroic Fighter 6 16 (combat) +8 By weapon +3 10m 11 +3 12+
Specific Examples HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves
Barbarian Hero 6 16 (primitive) +8 By weapon +3 10m 11 +3 12+
Barbarian Tribal 1 12 (primitive) +2 By weapon 10m 8 +1 15+
Gang Boss 3 14 +4 By weapon +1 10m 9 +2 14+
Gang Member 1 12 +1 By weapon 10m 7 +1 15+
Gengineered Killer 4 16 +5 By weapon +1 15m 10 +2 13+
Legendary Fighter 10 20 (powered) +12 x 2 By weapon +4 10m 12 +5 10+
Military Elite 3 16 (combat) +4 By weapon +1 10m 10 +2 14+
Military Soldier 1 16 (combat) +1 By weapon 10m 9 +1 15+
Normal Human 1 10 +0 Unarmed 10m 6 +1 15+
Pirate King 7 18 (powered) +9 By weapon +2 10m 11 +3 12+
Police Officer 1 14 +1 By weapon 10m 8 +1 15+
Serial Killer 6 12 +8 By weapon +3 10m 12 +3 12+
Skilled Professional 1 10 +0 By weapon 10m 6 +2 15+
Warrior Tyrant 8 20 (powered) +10 By weapon +3 10m 11 +3 11+
Dmg is the damage the NPC inflicts in combat. For 
human combatants, this depends on the weapon they’re 
using, with most ordinary men and women carrying 
no real weapon. Very capable warriors might do ad -
ditional damage on top of the weapon’s roll, from +1 
to +4 points.
Move is the distance the NPC travels when they 
take a Move action in combat. For humans, this is ten 
meters, though gengineered or other boosted subjects 
might be able to move faster than this.
ML is the NPC’s Morale score, their likelihood of 
retreating when in danger. When an NPC faces un -
usual peril, they need to make a Morale check on 2d6. 
If they roll equal or less than their Morale score, they 
withstand the danger and continue fighting. If they roll 
more than their Morale, they break. Poorly-trained 
combatants will simply run for their lives or beg for 
mercy, while more hardened ones will make a fighting 
withdrawal to a place of safety. PCs never need to make 
Morale checks.
Most groups will need to make a Morale check 
the first time one of their members is killed or disabled, 
and the first time it looks like they’re losing the fight. If 
they succeed in both checks, they’ll continue fighting as 
long as it doesn’t seem hopeless. NPCs with no martial 
aptitude at all must also make a Morale check when 
lethal combat begins; on a failure, they’re too shocked, 
frightened, or disbelieving to do anything useful, and 
will stand frozen, run in terror, or try to ignore what’s 
obviously happening around them.
Skills summarizes the NPC’s general aptitude at 
skill checks related to their profession or role. When 
the NPC needs to make a skill check or compete in an 
opposed skill check, they may add this skill bonus to 
their roll if the test relates to role. If the activity has 
nothing especially to do with what the NPC would be 
good at, they cannot add this bonus, and just roll the 
skill check unmodified. Most NPCs will have this at 
+1, while skilled professionals will have it at +2, and 
exceptionally gifted and expert NPCs will have it at +3 
or +4. Sector-wide legends will have it at +5.
Saves are the single saving throw score that all 
NPCs use whenever they need to make a saving throw. 
Whether Mental Physical, or Evasion, the NPC rolls 
against this single target. Most NPCs have a save score 
of 15 minus half their hit dice, rounded down.
===== PAGE 200 =====
1 96• robotS and viS
roboTs and VIs
The prevalence of robots varies between sectors. Some 
positively teem with sentient VIs programmed for var-
ious purposes, while others have hardly any robotics at 
all beyond industrial automation. The creation of par-
ticularly sophisticated bots, especially sentient-seeming 
VIs, is critically influenced by the local metadimension-
al energy environment. With an unfriendly higher-or-
der energy shadow, the intricate quantum flux of VI 
“brains” cannot function properly. True AIs are immune 
to such vagaries, but True AIs are almost impossible 
to create in bulk, even for the lost industries of the 
Terran Mandate.
Expert Systems and VIs
In the vast majority of sectors, robots are operated 
by expert systems programmed to carry out a specific 
kind of work. These expert systems may feign human 
intelligence, but they are non-sentient and incapable 
of dealing with environments and situations outside 
their normal operational scope. The more sophisticat-
ed and expensive the expert system, the more flexible 
it is about handling events within its purview.
In some sectors, however, the local environment 
is suitable for the creation of extremely sophisticated 
expert systems bolstered by quantum neural nets. It is 
a constant point of debate over whether the resultant 
“Virtual Intelligences” are truly self-aware or simply 
give a perfect impression of such. Some sectors hold 
the former, and grant VI full human rights, forbidding 
their makers from implanting behavioral imperatives. 
Most sectors believe the latter, using VIs as a labor 
force programmed to deeply enjoy their utilitarian 
function. VIs in such sectors can be bought, sold, and 
mistreated much as any other piece of property.
While VIs have or can mimic human-level intel -
ligence, they can also be programmed with behavioral 
imperatives or curbs, giving them a deep urge to per-
form a certain kind of work or an unbreakable inability 
to carry out certain kinds of acts. Most service VIs are 
programmed with imperatives to love their work and 
be thoroughly happy in carrying it out, as well as with 
curbs against harming human beings or allowing them-
selves to be damaged. These impulses are overwhelm-
ing, but not especially nuanced; the more specific and 
complex the programmed psychological limit, the more 
prone it is to failure or misguidance.
VIs are not True AIs. They do not have a quantum 
identity core and they are inexorably tied into the spe-
cific hardware and chassis they were created to operate. 
While mods and adjustments can be made to this “birth 
body”, the VI cannot be transplanted into a new chassis, 
nor can they survive the destruction of their body.
VIs are much more difficult to produce than 
non-sentient expert systems. The quantum growth 
process is much more reliable and tractable than that 
used to create a True AI, but it still fails annoyingly 
often. As a consequence, even sectors where the en -
vironment allows the creation of VIs often prefer to 
use simple, cheap, reliably-replicable “dumb” expert 
systems for mundane tasks.
Expert System Bots
The robots listed in the adjacent table are standard-is-
sue expert system bots, each one equipped with a level 
1 expert system. Each expert system is programmed to 
handle a particular role: security, tour guidance, indus-
trial labor, household cleaning, personal companion-
ship, child care, or some other general field. The most 
basic programming and cognitive hardware counts as 
a “level 1” system. More sophisticated work allows for 
level 2 programming, up to level 4 as the maximum for 
most TL4 sectors.
Each level of expert system beyond the first comes 
with upgrades to the robot’s durability, danger manage-
ment, and exception handling skills. They also add to 
the robot’s base cost; a level 2 expert system doubles a 
robot’s base cost, for example. The table below gives 
the various expert system levels, the hit die and saving 
throw bonus granted by each, the attack bonus a given 
level adds, and the skill check modifier to be applied to 
checks related to the bot’s intended function.
Level HD Atk. Skill Save Cost
1 Base Base Base Base Base
2 +1 +1 +1 1 lower x2
3 +2 +2 +1 1 lower x4
4 +4 +4 +2 2 lower x8
Whenever the bot is put in a position not cov -
ered by its programming, it needs to make a confusion 
check. The GM rolls 2d6, adding its skill bonus, against 
a difficulty based on the strangeness of the situation. 
A situation partly within its usual compass might be 
difficulty 7, while a completely uncovered event would 
be difficulty 9, and a situation that is both completely 
uncovered and clearly dangerous would be 11. On a 
success, the expert system does something reasonable 
and in line with its function. On a failure, the expert 
system does what it’s normally meant to do in an inap-
propriate way or direction.
Damaged bots can be repaired by someone with at 
least Fix-0 skill and a postech toolkit. One unit of spare 
parts and fifteen minutes of work can repair a number 
of lost hit points equal to the bot’s expert system level. 
Expert system bots reduced to zero hit points are de -
stroyed and cannot be salvaged.
Expert system bots do have “morale” of a kind; 
when destruction seems imminent, most are pro -
grammed to retreat. This can be overridden by owners.
===== PAGE 201 =====
robotS and viS •1 97 
Robot Type HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves Cost
Janitor Bot 1 14 N/A N/A 5m 8 +1 15+ 1,000
Civilian Security Bot 1 15 +1 1d8 stun 10m 12 +1 15+ 5,000
Repair Bot 1 14 +0 1d6 tool 10m 8 +1 15+ 5,000
Industrial Work Bot 2 15 +0 1d10 crush 5m 8 +1 14+ 2,000
Companion Bot 1 12 +0 1d2 unarmed 10m 6 +1 15+ 2,500
Soldier Bot 2 16 +1 By weapon 10m 10 +1 14+ 10,000
Heavy Warbot 6 18 +8 x 2 2d8 plasma 15m 10 +2 12+ 50,000
Virtual Intelligences
In sectors where VIs can still be manufactured, the 
price is equivalent to ten times the cost of an equiv -
alent expert system bot. Thus, a stock companion bot 
upgraded with VI programming would cost 25,000 
credits. To give a top-of-the-line heavy warbot with 
a level 4 expert system VI wiring would leave the bot 
costing a tremendous four million credits.
VI wiring does not integrate well with conven -
tional expert system programming. The same static 
procedures and protocols that can make a level 4 ex -
pert system so good at its specific task are difficult for 
a human-like VI intellect to process, and it requires 
intensive and expensive cognitive reinforcement to 
allow the VI to take advantage of these resources. As a 
consequence, it is very rare for VIs to be implanted in 
high-end expert system bots.
Most VIs do not develop additional skills or com-
petencies, nor do they exhibit personal growth or 
changes in personality. They are the way they have 
been programmed, even if inhibitor curbs and behav-
ioral imperatives are absent.
Some VIs, however, are different. For whatever 
inexplicable reason, these VIs are capable of learning 
and growing as human beings are. They lack the po -
tential for godlike intelligence possessed by True AIs 
and they cannot make effective use of supplementary 
cognitive resources as True AIs can, but over time and 
with experience, these VIs can become as skilled and 
capable as any human.
Such “clever” VIs are an annoyance in sectors 
where VI bots are common. Buyers don’t want their 
receptionist bots to suddenly decide they’d rather be 
poets, and while behavioral imperatives and inhibitor 
curbs still have an effect on clever VIs, some of these 
bots can “out-think” their limits and sidestep these 
blocks. Some worlds allow clever VIs to exist as free 
citizens, while others consider them public nuisances 
to be scrapped if they wander off from their owners.
VI bots are more durable than their ordinary cous-
ins. If reduced to zero hit points by trauma less than a 
hit with a Heavy weapon or similar complete ruin, they 
can be repaired with 24 hours of work by one tech with 
Fix-0. Jury-rigging a downed VI back into operation is 
much faster, allowing them to “heal” with spare parts 
as if they were an ordinary bot. If reduced to zero HP 
again before a 24-hour overhaul, however, they perish.
Types of Bots
While a wide range of bots are available on the market 
in most sectors, the selection given here cover most of 
the robots likely to be encountered by PCs. Most ci -
vilian bots are programmed to avoid harming humans, 
but such programming can be overridden by sufficient-
ly determined owners.
Janitor bots are ubiquitous, cheap and reliable 
droids that can clean up detritus and keep an office, 
street, or private home tidy. Their small size and lim-
ited array of tools make them useless in a fight save as 
targets or convenient explosives carriers.
Civilian security bots  are sometimes found guard-
ing locations. They’re not smart enough to handle 
complex human interactions, but their tireless deter -
mination is convenient when guarding a place that few 
humans are expected to enter. Most models use a stun-
ning touch that non-lethally disables targets, while less 
gentle bots are equipped with guns or melee weapons.
Repair bots and industrial work bots are found at 
work sites and in starships or other complex technical 
edifices. Expert system repair bots are extremely effi -
cient about dealing with standard failures and damage, 
but they can “panic” when faced with crises beyond 
their usual operating parameters. Industrial work bots 
are slow, tough, heavy machines most often used for 
lifting and manipulating heavy objects in need of laser 
welding or other shaping.
Companion bots range from nannybots and petbots 
to specially-designed “companions” for other purposes. 
The latter are strictly regulated on many worlds, either 
to encourage reproduction, to quash their use for rep-
rehensible urges, or out of perceived fears of societal 
decay and decadence.
Soldier bots are designed on humanoid lines so as 
to easily use standard human vehicles and equipment. 
The chaotic and confusing nature of warfare leaves 
most soldier bots of somewhat limited utility without 
a human bot wrangler to direct them, but when a wave 
attack is needed, a simple self-preservation toggle can 
be flipped off and the iron horde can be aimed at a foe.
Heavy warbots are ogreish engines of war with in-
tegral plasma guns and the ability to attack twice with 
each Main Action. In addition, most are capable of 
mounting a Heavy weapon which may be fired in lieu 
of the plasma guns. They’re most often used as mobile 
heavy weapons platforms for squads in the field.
===== PAGE 202 =====
1 98• robotS and viS
Robots In Your Campaign
A GM is not obligated to include VIs or ubiquitous ro-
botics in her campaign. Adding these elements can have 
a significant effect on a setting, and sometimes they 
can prove to be a distraction from the sort of play that 
the group wants to have. A GM is always well within 
her rights to simply decide that the sector lacks the 
necessary metadimensional environment for VI pro -
duction and is short on many of the critical minerals 
for producing expert system bots. Outside of industrial 
assembly lines and mindless extraction work, labor is 
performed by humans.
Sometimes, however, a GM will want to include 
VIs in her sector, either because she’s emulating a genre 
where intelligent robots are a commonplace, or because 
a particular player wants to play a PC VI, or because 
she simply likes them.
If a GM does decide to add VIs to her setting, she’ll 
need to decide how common they are and how most 
of the worlds in the sector treat them. The simplest 
way to do this is to gently gloss over the economic and 
social impact of VIs. The world operates much as it 
does today, with humans doing most of the work and 
VIs serving only occasional functions as showpieces 
of the wealthy or off-stage laborers in industry. They 
are programmed to love their work, they’re “happy” in 
a robotic sense, and the various worlds of the sector 
give little consideration to wider issues of VI rights or 
the morality of programmed VI behavioral imperatives.
Other GMs will want to increase the impact of VIs 
on particular worlds. Perhaps some of them have large-
ly replaced their low-skilled members with VI laborers, 
and the replaced humans are either frustrated and an-
gry or kept pacified by robotic dole payments. Other 
worlds might dispute the lack of rights that most VIs 
have, insisting that a VI ought not to be programmed 
with behavioral imperatives at “birth”, but be allowed 
to choose its own functionality. Of course, it might be 
that almost no one would bother to build them in that 
case, but such crusaders might believe it better that a 
VI never be “born” than that it be created in servitude. 
In brief, the GM can pick some aspect of VI existence 
and use the conflicts inherent in it to spice up the sector.
Expert system bots are less disruptive to a cam -
paign because they come with less moral baggage that 
a society has to deal with. It’s easy for a GM to simply 
decide that most expert system bots are only smart 
enough for simple industrial tasks or menial labor, and 
that the impact they have on the local economy doesn’t 
necessarily force it into some strange futuristic pattern. 
There are still poor janitors, grouchy middle-aged se-
curity guards, and cynical street-corner prostitutes in 
an age of robotic labor.
Some PC groups will be very keen to buy robots 
of their own, the better to help in their adventures. So 
long as you keep an expert system’s limitations in mind, 
this shouldn’t be disruptive, and it would make an ex-
cellent sink for a party’s excess money.
===== PAGE 203 =====
vi Player CharaCterS •1 99 
VI Player CharaCTers
In campaigns where the GM allows it, a player can 
choose to make a VI as a player character. They do this 
by spending their free focus pick on one of the origins 
listed below. These origin foci have only one level, and 
normally can only be taken during character creation. 
In exceptional cases, a human PC transformed into a 
full-conversion cyborg might be allowed to take it later.
Special VI Rules
All VI PCs have the same attributes, hit points, abilities, 
and character classes as humans do, but normal VIs 
cannot be Psychics nor take the Partial Psychic class 
option for Adventurers. They are created the same 
way as any other human PC and start out at first level. 
While they may have been built to be a particular type 
of bot, they use their own statistics, and not those for 
their type on page 197. VIs that are not wearing armor 
normally have Armor Class 10, just as humans do.
VIs need neither sleep, eat, nor drink, requiring 
one Type B cell per week of operation away from read-
ily-available current. They are immune to vacuum but 
suffer degradation from radiation as humans do. They 
cannot be poisoned or diseased by normal forms of 
toxin. They can be reprogrammed, altering or erasing 
their personality and behavioral limits, but such men-
tal remodeling takes at least an undisturbed month to 
execute by someone with at least Program-1 skill. Most 
VIs will fight to their destruction to avoid such a fate.
VIs can be healed with spare parts and the work of 
someone with Fix-0 skill. VIs can always repair them -
selves, even without the requisite skill. Each unit of 
spare parts heals lost hit points equal to the VI’s charac-
ter level and takes fifteen minutes to apply. VIs cannot 
normally be affected by biopsionic healing effects.
VIs reduced to zero hit points but not entirely 
smashed are incapacitated and Badly Damaged. Re -
moving this quality requires 24 hours of work by a 
technician and at least one unit of spare parts, after 
which damage can be repaired as normal. As a field 
expedient, a tech can jury-rig a Badly Damaged VI in 
the field, healing it with spare parts at the normal rate 
and speed. If such a bot is reduced to zero hit points 
again while Badly Damaged, however, it must make a 
Physical save or be permanently destroyed.
VIs are intimately connected to their specific hard-
ware, and cannot be transplanted into new forms. Cos-
metic alterations can be made, however, and equipment 
can be grafted into the VI’s chassis. Such built-in equip-
ment costs twice as much as a stand-alone component 
and takes a week to properly integrate into the VI’s 
system. A VI can have a total number of encumbrance 
points worth of additional gear grafted onto it equal to 
half its Constitution score, rounded down. Such gear 
may require its own separate power source or ammu-
nition supply. VIs cannot make use of cyberware.
Android
You were built as an android, a robot indistinguish -
able from a human without a medical-grade inspection. 
Most androids are “companion” bots, though other VIs 
with roles that involve significant human interaction 
may also be built as androids. Minor scuffs and cuts 
don’t reveal your robotic nature, but if reduced to zero 
hit points, your unnatural innards are obvious.
Level 1: Gain a bonus skill related to your intended func-
tion. You have all the usual traits and abilities of 
a VI robot.
VI Worker Bot
You were built for industrial or technical labor, where 
a human face was an unnecessary luxury. Most such 
VI bots are humanoid, if only to more conveniently 
manipulate human-scale devices, but their inhuman 
nature is obvious.
Level 1: Gain a bonus skill related to your intended 
function. Choose an attribute associated with your 
work and gain a +1 bonus to its modifier, up to a 
maximum of +2. You have all the usual traits and 
abilities of a VI robot.
VI Vehicle Bot
Some VIs were instantiated in actual vehicles rather 
than conventional humanoid bodies. Most were purely 
synthetic in origins, but some sectors retain the tech -
niques for brain transplants into non-human bodies. 
Some polities have been known to conduct full-body 
cyberneticization of soldiers into tanks, warships, at-
tack helicopters, and other military vehicles. As a ve -
hicle, you are usually equipped with manipulator arms 
that can be used on adjacent objects. You may oper -
ate the individual elements of your vehicle as if they 
were your own limbs, attacking once per round with a 
mounted weapon of your choice.
Level 1: Gain Pilot as a bonus skill. Pick a vehicle ac -
ceptable to the GM, usually a drone, hoverbike 
or gravcar. You become that vehicle. You retain 
your usual attributes but gain the vehicle’s Armor 
score. You are Armor Class 10, modified by your 
Dexterity score. A tech can improve your Armor 
Class by aftermarket modifications, adding up to 
three times their Fix skill to your Armor Class at 
a cost of 1,000 credits per point of improvement.
You use the vehicle’s hit points until your 
own normally-rolled hit point score exceeds that 
number. Many VI vehicles purchase a drone or 
humanoid robot body to carry on board and em-
ploy for remote operation in areas unsuitable for 
a vehicle; you can pilot a single surrogate body in 
lieu of your own Main Action, provided there’s no 
ECM to jam the control transmissions.
===== PAGE 204 =====
200• beaStS
beasTs
Most alien beasts are simply flavor for a world, odd 
creatures to decorate the background and provide some 
light interest for the players. Sometimes, however, a 
GM needs a genuinely dangerous beast, either to oc -
cupy some perilous wilderness or to threaten the PCs 
and their allies.
When creating a beast, work from your needs. 
Build the creature with the statistics and role that you 
need for your adventure, and then decorate those basic 
statistics with the creature’s appearance, special hazards, 
and behavior.
Creating Beasts
To build an alien beast, it’s easiest to start with some 
Terran referent. A completely alien and exotic creature 
with no relation to any earthly life form tends to be 
very difficult to explain to players and it can be awk -
ward for the GM to guess its normal behavior.
The tables on the opposite page provide some ba-
sic suggestions for styling the essential animal features 
of the beast. Start with the “Basic Animal Features” to 
get the creature’s general theme, and then move on to 
identify its body plan. You might then add on some 
novelty to its limbs or skin, decide the main weapon it 
uses to hunt prey or defend itself, and choose a general 
size for the animal.
The basic animal features serve only as a starting 
point for your creativity. The creature might have a 
mammalian general plan, but you could then decide 
that its “fur” is a stiff, glassy mineral exudate that slashes 
anything that bites or strikes it. It can be helpful to stick 
to one basic animal type for a given alien world, with all 
the creatures the PCs encounter sharing similar broad 
features or common traits.
While a fully-developed ecosphere might include 
countless different evolutionary strategies, sticking to 
just one or two in play helps characterize a world and 
give a sense of consistency to its fauna. If all the dan -
gerous creatures of Scutum have thick moss-colored 
armor plating, then the PCs will be able to guess that a 
strange creature with thick moss-colored armor plating 
is probably an import from Scutum.
Swarms
Sometimes a beast is only meaningfully dangerous in 
vast packs, like a swarm of ants or a squealing tide of 
ravenous rats. Other times beasts are found most often 
in huge herds rather than as lone individuals.
To create such a swarm, take the basic animal type 
and quadruple its hit dice. For tiny creatures that have 
only 1 hit point, give the swarm 4 hit dice. The swarm 
gets its usual attack against anyone in contact with it, 
but on a miss, it still does the minimum possible dam -
age to the target unless the victim is immune to its 
attacks. Thus, a rat swarm that has a +1 attack bonus 
and does 1d2 damage on a hit would roll that attack 
against every PC caught in the swarm. On a hit, they 
would do 1d2 damage, and a miss would still do 1 point.
Any attack against the swarm automatically hits, 
assuming the weapon is useful. Firing a pistol into a 
creeping carpet of ants is singularly useless, but waving 
a flaming torch in front of rats or throwing a grenade 
into the swarm might help dispatch the pack.
Beast Behavior
Many alien creatures will have no inherited aversion 
to humans, and will not fear them. Predators will hunt 
them if they look like food and prey will ignore them 
if they don’t look like predators.
In combat, predators will only fight to the death if 
maddened or cornered. Sane predators cannot afford to 
get hurt while hunting. In addition to the usual times 
for Morale checks, beasts must make an additional 
check the first time their “prey” harms the predator.
Importing Creatures
Aside from the beasts you can create with these charts, 
an endless supply of fantasy monsters and exotic crea-
tures await lifting from other old-school games. Almost 
any of the “monsters” found in traditional old-school 
role-playing games can be imported almost unchanged 
into Stars Without Number, requiring little more than 
an attack bonus and Armor Class conversion. Reskin 
them to fit your needs, and voila; you have your beast.
Beast Type HD AC Atk. Dmg. Move ML Skills Saves
Small Vicious Beast 1 HP 14 +1 1d2 10m 7 +1 15+
Small Pack Hunter 1 13 +1 1d4 15m 8 +1 15+
Large Pack Hunter 2 14 +2 1d6 15m 9 +1 14+
Large Aggressive Prey Animal 5 13 +4 1d10 15m 8 +1 12+
Lesser Lone Predator 3 14 +4 x 2 1d8 each 15m 8 +2 14+
Greater Lone Predator 5 15 +6 x 2 1d10 each 10m 9 +2 12+
Terrifying Apex Predator 8 16 +8 x 2 1d10 each 20m 9 +2 11+
Gengineered Murder Beast 10 18 +10 x 4 1d10 each 20m 11 +3 10+
===== PAGE 205 =====
beaStS •201 
sTylIng The beasT
You can use these tables to assemble a general look for 
your beast. First, roll on the basic animal features table 
to get a general “theme” for the creature. If you ever 
need inspiration for particular details about the crea -
ture, just refer back to its basic theme.
Next, roll on the tables below to get additional in-
spiration. Note that you don’t have to roll on any par-
ticular one. Instead, just use them to fill in the blanks 
and spark your own creativity, editing things when 
necessary to fit the creature’s intended role.
d6 Body Plan Limb Novelty Skin Novelty Main Weapon Size
1 Humanoid Wings Hard shell Teeth or mandibles Cat-sized
2 Quadruped Many joints Exoskeleton Claws Wolf-sized
3 Many-legged Tentacles Odd texture Poison Calf-sized
4 Bulbous Opposable thumbs Molts regularly Harmful discharge Bull-sized
5 Amorphous Retractable Harmful to touch Pincers Hippo-sized
6 Roll twice Varying sizes Wet or slimy Horns Elephant-sized
d10 Basic Animal Features
1 Amphibian, froggish or newtlike
2 Bird, winged and feathered
3 Fish, scaled and torpedo-bodied
4 Insect, beetle-like or fly-winged
5 Mammal, hairy and fanged
6 Reptile, lizardlike and long-bodied
7 Spider, many-legged and fat
8 Exotic, made of wholly alien elements
9-10 Roll twice and mix the results.
Behavioral Traits
d8 Predator Prey Scavenger
1 Hunts in kin-group packs Moves in vigilant herds Never attacks unwounded prey
2 Favors ambush attacks Exists in small family groups Uses other beasts as harriers
3 Cripples prey and waits for death They all team up on a single foe Always flees if significantly hurt
4 Pack supports alpha-beast attack They go berserk when near death Poisons prey, waits for it to die
5 Lures or drives prey into danger They’re violent in certain seasons Disguises itself as its prey
6 Hunts as a lone, powerful hunter They’re vicious if threatened Remarkably stealthy
7 Only is predator at certain times Symbiotic creature protects them Summons predators to weak prey
8 Mindlessly attacks humans Breeds at tremendous rates Steals prey from weaker predator
d8 Harmful Discharges
1 Acidic spew doing its damage on a hit
2 Toxic spittle or cloud, use adjacent chart
3 Super-heated or super-chilled spew
4 Sonic drill or other disabling noise
5 Natural laser or plasma discharge
6 Nauseating stench or disabling chemical
7 Equipment-melting corrosive
8 Explosive pellets or chemical catalysts
Harmful discharges usually use a normal attack roll and 
inflict the typical damage on a hit. At your discretion, 
some discharges may have additional effects, such as 
poison, gear destruction, ongoing acidic damage, or 
an explosive area of effect. Appropriate Physical or 
Evasion saving throws might be called for to avoid the 
worst of such perils.
d6 Poison Onset Duration
1 Death Instant 1d6 rounds
2 Paralysis 1 round 1 minute
3 1d4 dmg per 
onset interval
1d6 rounds 10 minutes
4 Convulsions 1 minute 1 hour
5 Blindness 1d6 minutes 1d6 hours
6 Hallucinations 1 hour 1d6 days
You can roll three times on the table above to generate 
a poison for a creature, or pick to suit your needs. Most 
effects incapacitate a victim, though blindness or ongo-
ing damage may not wholly disable a PC.
PCs can usually attempt a Physical save to resist a 
poison. Toxins can be treated with a medkit or antidote 
stim. If the medic lacks the specific antidote to a poison, 
they can make an Int/Heal skill check to try to halt it. 
The difficulty is usually 9, with one check allowed.
===== PAGE 206 =====
202• alienS
alIens
Exotic alien races are a staple of science fiction, and 
most GMs running Stars Without Number are going 
to want a few types of sapients to round out a sector. 
Some GMs might prefer to run a strictly human game, 
leaving humanity alone in this particular corner of the 
cosmos, but other GMs will want to have the details 
of a few alien races in hand, if only to help envision 
the kind of artifacts and ruins that they might have left 
behind. This section will discuss the role of aliens in a 
game and a process for creating your own alien races.
The Use of Aliens in the Game
When adding an alien race to your sector, it’s neces -
sary to keep in mind the ultimate purpose you have for 
including them. A given species might be fascinating 
to you, but if they don’t actually help to accomplish 
something for your game it’s likely that the players will 
simply gloss over their existence. By having a concrete 
purpose in mind for a race you can ensure that the 
players have a useful reason to interact with them.
Aliens are useful as antagonists. The classic “bug-
eyed monster” trope has survived for a reason; unthink-
ingly hostile and uncommunicative beings make great 
fodder for brute physical struggle. Making these mon -
sters part of a sapient, tool-using species allows them to 
scale upward in threat the way no beast can, and con-
tinue to imperil even an experienced, well-equipped 
band of adventurers.
Antagonism can take more forms than simple 
combativeness. Aliens can want things, and want them 
for reasons that would make no sense at all to a human. 
Biological imperatives, exotic religions, alien philoso -
phies, and customs born on completely un-Earth-like 
worlds can all justify goals and purposes that would be 
entirely irrational for a human being. Humans might 
find themselves at cross purposes with these aliens 
without ever fully understanding why the beings are 
pursuing a given goal.
From a GM’s perspective, this is a wonderful trait 
for building adventures. If you need aliens to pursue 
some goal, however bizarre, you can simply add a trait 
to them that makes that goal important. For example, 
if you need aliens to be obsessed with wiping out the 
humans on a given planet, you can simply decide that 
the planet is their ancestral homeworld, to which they 
must return every thousand years in order to perform a 
great spawning rite. The presence of the humans there 
defiles the world, and the aliens grow increasingly fran-
tic as the time for the rite approaches.
Aliens also make excellent patrons for many of the 
same reasons that they make good antagonists. You can 
give them a good reason to want almost anything, and 
players are unlikely to balk at it as unlikely or implau-
sible. If you need to give the players a reason to go 
somewhere, do something, or find something, you can 
use aliens to drive the process. The matter might be 
so important to the aliens that they find themselves 
willing to employ human agents to accomplish their 
ends, or it may be that only humans have the numbers 
and strength to help them.
Aliens are occasions for exploration and discov -
ery. While this may not have the immediate adventure 
utility of an antagonist or a patron, one of the things 
about sandbox gaming that appeals to many players 
is the opportunity to go out and discover new things. 
The universe is full of bizarre and exotic beings, and 
there can be a lot of enjoyment in learning about their 
cultures and traits. Most players aren’t interested in a 
full-dress anthropological study of an alien race, but 
there is an excitement in visiting uncharted worlds and 
meeting strange and wondrous beings.
In some cases, this exploration doesn’t even need 
live aliens. The universe is laden with numerous an -
cient alien ruins, and players can get a good conception 
of a long-lost race simply from examining what they’ve 
left behind. A GM with a firm grasp on a species’ psy-
chology and physiology has much of what he needs to 
create their abandoned cities and outposts and to stock 
them with art, artifacts, and remnants for the entice -
ment of exploring PCs.
Humanoid species make the most widely useful 
aliens, and most of the species you create should proba-
bly be of that variety. Aliens that are too hard to under-
stand tend to be more animate plot devices, operating 
by utterly incomprehensible rules and motivations. 
Human-like races allow more scope for diplomacy and 
response to an alien culture, because their societies are 
fundamentally comprehensible by humans.
The Like and the Others
Most alien races in the universe of Stars Without Num-
ber can be divided up into two different classes – the 
Like and the Others. The Like are those species with in-
tellects and societies that are at least somewhat compre-
hensible to humankind. They may have exotic biologies 
and strange customs, but humans can understand their 
motivations and deal with them within a more-or-less 
comprehensible framework.
The Others are those species that are simply too 
alien for human communication. Entities of sentient 
lithic structures, congeries of crystal, even intelligent 
waveform interactions created by the interplay of en-
ergies through alien rock formations… the Others are 
simply too different for humans to understand. Their 
goals are incomprehensible, their technology is often 
hard to even recognize, let alone use, and it’s possible 
that they don’t even realize that humanity is a sentient 
species. The Others are generally avoided if at all pos-
sible, though at times “wars” break out when an Other 
species vents anger on humanity for reasons unknown.
===== PAGE 207 =====
alienS •203 
Other races are rare, but some xenologists have 
suggested that they may be much more common than 
humanity imagines. Places that would never support 
Like life might be teeming with the bizarre offspring 
of Other organisms, unnoticed because human scouts 
haven’t bothered to look in such unpromising places. 
Many Other species might not even be recognized as 
life by humanity.
Alien Biology
As a rule of thumb, it’s easiest to make Like aliens some 
flavor of humanoid. They may have a few extra limbs 
or somewhat different body geometry, but humanoid 
aliens tend to be easier to build and run than those 
with drastically different body types. There’s less need 
to adjust human assumptions about architecture, tech-
nology, and clothing than there would be for a species 
of six-legged centauroid mothmen. Of course, if you 
enjoy the prospect of working out the ramifications of 
having four gripping hands and organic wheels, you 
shouldn’t feel shackled to the humanoid shape.
Aliens of the Other type can come in any shape or 
size, largely because they aren’t intended to be com -
prehensible. Their technology and architecture doesn’t 
need to have any link with human conceptions of such; 
some Others may not even use technology as humans 
understand it, but instead manipulate their environ -
ment with inborn abilities or subtype-creatures of their 
own species. Most Other species function as plot de -
vices in a game, and it’s not necessary to put the same 
effort into detailing their “biology” if the species aren’t 
intended to make human sense in the first place.
Humanlike aliens are just that; extremely close 
to humans in outward appearance. They might have 
unusual skin or hair coloration, different hair growth 
distributions, an odd number of fingers, cranial ridges, 
a novel skin texture, variant ear shapes, or different 
average body builds or sizes, but they largely appear 
like humans. Xenobiologists postulate that the human 
shape is simply a very successful evolutionary route on 
Earth-like planets, and other worlds with similar con-
ditions are likely to produce similar sapients. Crank sci-
entists tend to favor theories of pan-galactic Creators 
that spread humanlike shapes throughout space; these 
theories conspicuously fail to take into account the dra-
matically different DNA and internal organ makeup of 
many humanlike aliens.
In general, it’s easiest to pick a particular real-world 
type of organism as a basic template for an alien race. 
The reality of their biology might be totally different, 
but using a terrestrial animal as a basic pattern can help 
you fill in details of structure and appearance that can 
otherwise be difficult to extemporize.
Avian aliens favor birdlike features. Feathered 
tails, wings, beaks, drastic coloring differences between 
males and females, skin either partially or fully covered 
in feathers, hollow bones, and clawed feet and hands 
are all traits that might be present in an avian-flavored 
alien. Such avians might have remarkably good vision 
or show unusual talent as pilots thanks to an evolu -
tionary predilection for thinking in three dimensions.
Reptilian aliens can range from the classic “liz -
ard man” look to a more subtle combination of 
pebble-scaled skin, membrane frills, broad bodies, 
cold-bloodedness, nictitating membranes, an excep -
tional sense of smell, thick claws, powerful builds, 
sharp teeth, and fine scales. Bodies may be broad and 
thick like that of a lizard, or perhaps sinuous like that 
of a snake. Reptilian aliens might be found especially 
on damp, watery worlds, and might be outright am -
phibious over all or part of their life spans.
Insectile aliens are usually possessed of chitinous 
“skin” and one or more pairs of compound eyes. Mem-
branous wings aren’t unknown, but are probably vesti-
gial and useless on all but the smallest or lightest aliens. 
Insectile aliens might have sucking mouthparts if their 
primary food source is plant sap- or blood- or might 
use chewing mandibles instead for a more solid diet. 
Insectile aliens that function as a hive collective are 
something of a classic trope, but there’s no reason that 
a species can’t instead take after more solitary hunting 
insects such as beetles or spiders.
Mammalian aliens might have very human-like 
appearances, or they might have fur, muzzles, claws, or 
quadrupedal modes of locomotion. Mammalian aliens 
are easy to conceptualize and describe, but if you want 
to play up the alienness of them, you’ll likely need to 
make sure they have some dramatic social or cultural 
difference, or some unique element of physiognomy.
Exotic aliens are built out of parts and materials 
that aren’t normally found in Terran life forms. A hu -
manoid might be composed out of a kind of organ -
ic plastic that makes up much of their home planet’s 
biochemistry, or be composed of an intricate array of 
interlocking crystals and woody organic elements. You 
should pick one or more materials that aren’t normally 
part of an animal’s body and have them play a major 
role in the alien’s biology. As a consequence, this kind 
of alien is probably highly dependent upon their home 
world for food and other biological necessities. If not, 
they likely spend a lot of effort synthesizing vital ma-
terials out of local supplies.
Hybrid aliens combine aspects of two or more of 
the types described here, and you can mix and match 
their components to create some blend that suits your 
purposes. Such hybrids might exist in multiple envi -
ronments, or be in a transitional evolutionary state.
d6 Alien Body Traits
1 Avian, bat-like, pterodactylian
2 Reptilian, amphibian, draconic
3 Insectile, beetle-like, spiderish, wasp-like
4 Mammalian, furred or bare-skinned
5 Exotic, composed of some novel substance
6 Hybrid of two or more types
===== PAGE 208 =====
204• alienS
Alien Psychology and Lenses
There are many different ways to fabricate a useful and 
interesting alien race, ranging from careful develop -
ment based on unique biologies or environments to 
more abstract methods of defining interesting traits. 
The method this section offers is intended to provide 
a GM with a few tools for producing alien races that 
feel sufficiently strange in play without leaving the GM 
groping to figure out how a given alien would react to 
a situation.
The first step is to understand that a Like alien race 
is fundamentally human. They may be shaped differ -
ently, they may dwell in a radically different environ -
ment, but they think, feel, and desire largely as humans 
do. Human vices and virtues almost certainly exist in 
their society and they are susceptible to the same sort 
of temptations and provocations that move humans. If 
you want to know what an alien is like, the first thing 
to do is to think of what a human is like.
The difference for aliens, however, is that they are 
very strongly influenced by one or two emotional or 
social traits, called Lenses. Everything about them, from 
the way their society is structured to the way they deal 
with strangers to the dreams they have for their own 
future revolves around these Lenses. The result is an 
alien culture that may not be deeply nuanced, but it is 
a culture that is very easily remembered by players and 
easily played by GMs. If you know that the two Lenses 
for the alien race of Churq are Collectivity and Fear, 
you know that a given Churq is going to be cowardly 
and intensely social. Courageous individuality will be 
noxious or incomprehensible to it and its social roles 
will revolve around the safety of the collective against 
the dreadful perils of the outside world.
Lenses should not be taken as the last word about 
a species. GMs who want to spend more time on the 
species’ psychology can elaborate as they wish, and all 
of the guidelines given for a Lens can be easily adjusted 
to whatever flavor the GM wishes to use. GMs can pick 
or roll one or more Lenses from among the following 
list, or generate their own as desired.
d20 Lens d20 Lens
1 Collectivity 11 Journeying
2 Curiosity 12 Joy
3 Despair 13 Pacifism
4 Domination 14 Pride
5 Faith 15 Sagacity
6 Fear 16 Subtlety
7 Gluttony 17 Tradition
8 Greed 18 Treachery
9 Hate 19 Tribalism
10 Honor 20 Wrath
Collectivity
These aliens might be hive-like in their social structure, 
natural communists, or simply very closely attached 
to the customs and interests of their social group. The 
importance of the individual is thought to be minimal, 
and members will cheerfully and readily sacrifice them-
selves for the good of the group. To willfully refuse to 
accept the consensus of the whole is an unspeakable 
sin, and to be separated permanently from one’s social 
group is a fate worse than death.
Curiosity
This species is insatiably curious, constantly prying into 
the affairs of those around them. Spying for this race 
carries no opprobrium whatsoever, and while they may 
attempt to maintain privacy for certain doings, all as-
sume it a given that matters will be discovered in the 
end. They love to explore new places and meet new 
sapients, and while they may be brutally indifferent to 
the fates or treatment of these beings, they’re always 
eager to observe them. Their societies tend to operate 
in a profoundly transparent manner, and some view 
the keeping of secrets as an automatic indication of 
malicious intent.
Despair
These aliens have fallen prey to a pervasive sense of 
failure and loss. Perhaps they are the remnants of a 
once-glorious empire or the survivors of some cata -
clysmic disaster for their people. What they once loved 
has been destroyed, and their sources of comfort and 
courage have failed them. Superficially, they might re-
semble those species that crave pleasure and indulgence, 
but their disports only serve to numb them to the exis-
tential gloom that taints the species. Their leadership 
is desultory at best, and sophisticated social structures 
tend to degrade into loose, diffident associations as 
their members no longer have the hope necessary to 
perpetuate them.
Domination
These aliens are consumed by a desire to conquer and 
rule, both each other and any other species unfortunate 
enough to share the stellar neighborhood. Some among 
them can be fair and thoughtful rulers, but others are 
nothing more than vainglorious tyrants. Among them-
selves, society tends to be organized in intricate and 
clearly-marked hierarchies, with advancement pro -
gressing along both official and illicit routes. These 
aliens constantly test their leaders, forcing them to 
maintain their position through strength and cunning.
Faith
Such a species is driven by religious concerns, organiz-
ing their society around their faith and its clergy. Most 
such species have a single faith. Others make do with a 
number of different religions, all followed with a fierce 
devotion. Challenges to this faith are not met with 
===== PAGE 209 =====
alienS •205 
outrage so much as blank incomprehension; for these 
beings, the truth of their religions is so self-evident 
that it seems irrational to ever question it. Those who 
most perfectly embody the teachings of their creeds 
tend to become rulers, their lives and will taken as an 
example for others.
Fear
These aliens live in constant fear. They may be natives 
of some lethal death-world, survivors of a species-an -
nihilating cataclysm, or simply evolved from weak and 
easily-devoured prey animals. The world is terrifying 
to them, and their societies are based around hiding 
or protecting themselves from these dreads. The most 
revered members are those who are best hidden or 
best protected, and who can give protection and con-
cealment to their fellows. Most of these races are quite 
cowardly by human measure, but occasionally they can 
be driven into a frenzy of terror in which they fight 
with the courage of the doomed.
Gluttony
These aliens devour. They are rapacious consumers, 
whether it is of food, living space, energy, or some oth-
er resource. They will do almost anything to increase 
access to this resource and are deeply indifferent to the 
needs of other species, and often of their own fellows 
as well. To consume greatly is glorious for this species, 
with the greatest and most respected members being 
those who have the greatest stockpiles of the resource 
to consume, or who provide the most to their followers. 
The purpose of existence is to eat, and all good things 
are understood as different modes of devouring.
Greed
These aliens are enormously greedy. Status depends al-
most entirely upon personal wealth, and their lives are 
spent in accumulating the greatest stores of value pos-
sible. Some focus on production, creating the wealth for 
their own benefit, while others seek to make a profit on 
trade. Some such greedy species have intricate property 
laws to safeguard what is accumulated, while others 
are little more than bandits among their own kind, too 
avaricious to let law interfere with their greed.
Hate
There is something these aliens hate, and it defines 
their culture completely by their opposition to it. It 
may be these aliens are rampant xenophobes, loath -
ing all who are not of their own kind. There may be 
acrid religious or political divisions among them, with 
individuals identifying completely with their sect and 
despising all the others. It could be an ancient enemy 
among the stars, a rival race that has wounded them 
so greatly as to be unforgivable. These aliens may spar 
and maneuver for power among their own kind, but all 
goals and individuals are to some degree subordinated 
to the needs of their immortal hate.
Honor
Whatever sort of society the race has, it is one obsessed 
with honorable behavior. Members will obey the social 
mores and expectations of their roles at all costs. Per-
sonal sacrifice for the sake of upholding these principles 
earns a member glory and esteem. Gaining advantage 
by means of inappropriate behavior or failing in one’s 
duty is shameful, and an entity that has compromised 
its honor too greatly may prefer death to continued 
existence.
Journeying
This species has an incurable wanderlust. Perhaps they 
roam the stars in fleets of massive spike drive ships, or 
they may make steady circuits of the nearby stars to 
connect their worlds and exchange people among them. 
More technologically primitive species might sail the 
waves of alien seas or make nomadic journeys across 
the continents of their world. Few of these aliens can 
ever be happy in remaining in one place for long, and 
they are forever scouting new worlds and new lands 
simply for the pleasure of being there a little while.
Joy
These aliens are relentless bon vivants, constantly in 
pursuit of pleasure and enjoyable excitement. Beauty, 
grace, and the inspiration of passion are their high -
est virtues. Those who produce the most exquisite art 
or inspire the most extravagant delight have effective 
rule over their fellows, though such species tend to be 
loosely-organized at best. The brute necessities of life 
are acknowledged as a necessity, but their societies are 
willing to sacrifice a great deal of efficiency and practi-
cality for the sake of immediate satisfaction.
Pacifism
The race is remarkably peaceful and nonviolent in 
nature. Few species survive while being totally averse 
to violent self-defense, but this race will never choose 
violence against living creatures as a means of gaining 
advantage or retaliating to wrongs. Among their own 
kind, violence is abhorrent and unnatural, and it is 
probable that the species is either herbivorous or sub-
sists by photosynthesis. A pacifist race may be peace -
ful, but there are more ways to do injury than through 
personal violence; the cession of trade, the destruction 
of property, and the incitement of divisions and confu-
sion among their enemies are all tools this race knows 
well. Pacifist species can also be quite oppressive at 
times, with an underclass constitutionally incapable 
of defending their possessions or privileges with force.
Pride
These aliens are suffused with an enormous pride in 
their own culture and species, and instinctively consid-
er themselves to be superior to the lesser beings they 
may encounter. A prideful species is not necessarily a 
hostile one; some such races have a certain sense of 
===== PAGE 210 =====
206• alienS
noblesse oblige toward their “lessers”, and some species’ 
pride shows in a resolute refusal to lower themselves 
to deceit, cruelty, or avarice. More often, however, this 
pride manifests in a casual contempt for the interests of 
their inferiors, and a single-minded focus on personal 
advancement and glory among their own kind.
Sagacity
These aliens love intellectual pursuits above all others. 
Logic, wisdom, and erudition are all prized as the best 
and most glorious expressions of their nature, and their 
rulers are invariably sage-kings of remarkable depth 
and breadth of understanding. Such understanding 
does not necessarily stand in well for good judgment, 
and sagacious alien civilizations are notorious for over-
reaching in their ambitions. Stupidity and ignorance 
are moral failings to this race, and some of them treat 
very harshly those species that they do not feel to be 
their intellectual peers.
Subtlety
Such a species is enormously cunning and patient in 
character, willing to endure years of suffering calmly 
in order to bring about some intricate plan. They shun 
open display of emotions or opinions, masking such 
things behind protocols of bland correctness. To reveal 
one’s true opinion about some contentious matter is 
a mark either of profound trust or a sign of obvious 
incipient treachery. The true ruler of such a species is 
almost never who it seems to be.
Tradition
This species devoutly reveres the past and the ways of 
their ancestors. Social interactions are stiffly ritualized, 
and society is ornate with the customs, traditions, and 
habits of their forebears. Innovations of any kind are 
viewed with deep suspicion, and the most favored solu-
tions to problems are those which have been employed 
before. Members of this species are intensely uncom-
fortable when forced to exercise their own judgment, 
and doing so in contravention to the past is almost im-
possible for them. Only when faced with a completely 
novel situation is any degree of personal initiative likely 
to be shown, and even in that case, the alien will try to 
reconcile it to some existing tradition.
Treachery
This species is uniformly treacherous and untrust -
worthy. Bargains and agreements are kept only so long 
as they are useful to both participants, and truthfulness 
is simply a tool to be placed next to deceit. There is 
no sense of acrimony or anger among these aliens at 
the inevitable betrayals that make up their societies; 
they consider it good and laudable that an individu -
al should seek its own best interests, and those who 
can most perfectly manipulate each other are naturally 
those most worthy to rule, for the health of the society 
directly influences the power of its head.
Tribalism
The aliens are fiercely tribal, divided up into myriad 
small groups that are as often at war with each other 
as they are cooperating. Such tribes tend to be built 
along familial lines, though some tribes are volitional in 
nature, representing different political or philosophical 
groups. A given alien’s loyalty is to its tribe before its 
species, and it is not uncommon for their enemies to 
use one group against another.
Wrath
The race is hot-tempered, prone to fits of personal vi-
olence. Disputes are settled by force, though rarely to 
the point of death among their own kind. Outsiders 
can expect swift and bloody retaliation for any insult 
or slight, and the prospect of death rarely intimidates 
these beings. Their chief mode of emotional expression 
is anger; wrath at obstacles, fury at enemies, and a slow 
smoldering burn when neither are available.
===== PAGE 211 =====
alienS •207 
Alien Social Structure
Once the Lenses for a species are chosen, you’ll need 
to establish a few important facts about the aliens. You 
need to make some decisions about their social struc -
ture, the goals of their leadership, their relationship 
with humanity, and the sort of examples that the PCs 
are likely to encounter.
Determining the social structure for the aliens can 
be done by answering a few basic questions and elabo-
rating outward from the answers to whatever degree of 
detail you find useful or enjoyable. In most cases, what-
ever social structure you hit on will apply only to those 
aliens in a specific sector. Far-flung races might have 
wildly different modes of rule among their different 
fragments, assuming that biological necessity doesn’t 
push them to certain kinds of societies.
First, decide how the species is ruled. You can roll 
randomly on the table below, or simply pick something 
that seems appropriate.
d8 Social Structure
1 Democratic
2 Monarchic
3 Tribal
4 Oligarchic
5-6 Multipolar Competitive
7-8 Multipolar Cooperative
Democratic: The species has a broadly democratic or -
ganization, with individual members having a 
formal say in the choice of leadership. This vot -
ing need not necessarily be based on numbers; it 
might be a vote with money, military power, re-
ligious influence, possession of certain biological 
traits, or any other metric that makes sense to the 
aliens. Whatever the specific currency, politics 
for this race tends to revolve around persuasion 
and diplomacy rather than use of military force to 
determine species-wide policies.
Monarchic: The species is ruled by a single being, with 
such rule justified by custom, biological impera -
tive, divine mandate, personal influence, or famil-
ial ties. Such monarchic societies almost invariably 
have a “noble” caste of some kind to act as adminis-
trators and officials for the monarch, and they usu-
ally make up the pool from which new monarchs 
are chosen. The specific title for a monarch will 
usually depend on the justification for their rule: 
Chieftain, Emperor, Broodmother, High Priest, 
Dictator, Chief Elder, or so forth.
Tribal: The species is organized into multiple tribes 
based on lineage, philosophy, or geographical lo-
cation. Tribes set their own laws and policies, and 
are prone to intense internal struggles over re -
sources and status. There may exist a “paramount 
tribe” that inflicts its will upon the others through 
brute strength or traditional esteem. Tribal lead-
ers tend to be personally distinguished, and usu -
ally have earned their position through personal 
accomplishments and the broad support of their 
tribemates.
Oligarchic: The species is led by a number of powerful 
or revered figures who work in nominal harmony. 
Individual oligarchs might have their own goals, 
but no single member has the strength to enforce 
its will upon the whole. These oligarchs might be 
the product of hereditary inheritance, or individ-
ual members of the species might one day aspire 
to join their numbers. 
Multipolar: The species has more than one leadership 
organization. Roll 1d6; on a 1-2 it has two, 3-4 
indicates three, and 5-6 indicates four. Roll on 
this table the requisite number of times to deter-
mine the nature of these organizations. Some such 
multipolar institutions operate in parallel; a tribal 
organization headed by one gender, for example, 
that determines the division of goods while a 
monarchic head of a different gender makes deci-
sions about the race’s relations with other species. 
Others are directly in conflict, such as a monarchy 
struggling against a democratic neighbor. 
Once you’ve determined the type of leadership 
the species favors, you can sort out any important 
details about their social structures. By default, you 
should assume that the aliens have some sort of an -
alog for any job or role that humans find necessary. 
The Churq might be cowardly collectivists, but even 
they need plumbers, soldiers, and tax collectors. You 
can take whatever human society suits you as the base 
template and then interpret the relevant roles through 
the Lenses you’ve picked for the species.
For example, if the Churq have the Lenses of Fear 
and Collectivism, their tax collectors might be hon -
ored exemplars of communal redistribution, judiciously 
taking from those who have excess in order to give to 
those who have less. The Churq gladly offer resources 
to the tax collector, because the offering proves that 
they producing excess resources, which proves to them 
that they are secure and safe in their plenty. A Churq 
who fails to produce for the collective suffers gnawing 
terror at the idea of dangerous scarcity and will redou-
ble its effort to contribute to the group.
Conversely, Churq soldiers might invariably be 
found in small groups, as an individual Churq is incapa-
ble of fighting effectively without the encouragement 
and safety of their brethren around them. They might 
specialize in terror attacks against enemy civilians, their 
intimate acquaintance with fear encouraging them to 
use it as a weapon against their enemies… their un -
armed, noncombatant enemies, preferably. A war be-
tween Churq collectives might never have a single open 
battle, but instead a sequence of ambushes and terror 
attacks until one collective loses its nerve and submits.
===== PAGE 212 =====
208• alienS
Alien Technology
Alien races tend to come in two different technological 
flavors. Some are quite technologically primitive, either 
through being too new to sapience to have had time 
to develop scientific arts, or because they are unfor -
tunate enough to inhabit a very resource-poor world. 
Such aliens might demonstrate remarkable ingenuity 
in making the most of their surroundings, but some 
worlds make advancement prohibitively difficult for 
a species.
Other aliens possess spike drives, advanced weap-
onry, fusion power, and all the other ornaments of a 
sophisticated star-faring civilization. These aliens are 
usually the remnants of a more expansionistic period, 
colonies and outposts that have evolved into home -
worlds for the survivors of the civilization. This gold-
en age is normally terminated by some kind of spe -
cies-wide disaster, whether natural in nature or the 
result of savage internal warfare. These worlds are 
usually too absorbed in their own affairs or ennui to 
have much interest in expansion.
Most advanced aliens have tech roughly equivalent 
to human TL4, though they’re often slightly superior 
in some areas while being somewhat worse in others. 
A few old, sophisticated races have the equivalent of 
TL5, though these species often produce devices and 
artifacts that are difficult for humans to use effectively. 
A handful of alien worlds show technology that is sim-
ply impossible for humanity to replicate at any known 
tech level, with artifices and creations that seem more 
magic than mundane science.
Aliens in the Sector
What role do these aliens play in the sector? Do they 
have their own sector homeworld, dominated by them 
and their kind, or do they instead live in enclaves on 
a human-ruled world? Do they live in orbital habitats, 
or convoys of massive spike drive ships? You should 
place the species according to your needs, preferably in 
a location that the players can be expected to eventually 
experience. 
You should also make a few quick decisions about 
how these aliens are generally treated by humans, and 
how they treat humans in turn. Some dangerous or 
obnoxious species might be unable to function in hu -
man societies, while others might be normal citizens 
on a sophisticated pan-racial planet. Some beings might 
be horrific or repellent to humans through no fault of 
their own, and subject to persecution by those who 
live around their “alien ghettos”. Such aliens are like -
ly to respond to the misuse much as humans might, 
albeit in ways strongly influenced by their Lenses. A 
Wrathful species might respond with brutal violence 
toward persecutors, while Joyful ones might try to win 
their tormentors over by demonstrating the beauty and 
delight they can bring to their friends.
Alien Motivation
Individual aliens are likely to have as wide and vary -
ing a set of motivations as any human. Alien govern -
ments and ruling institutions, however, are liable to 
have more specific goals. Acquiring a new homeworld, 
ensuring the suppression of would-be pogromchiks, 
vengeance against a hated world or species, or any oth-
er such long-term goal would be suitable for an alien 
government.
The broad goals of an alien government are usually 
obvious, but the subtle plans and maneuvers they use to 
accomplish these purposes can be less clear. PC groups 
can be commissioned by alien officials to perform acts 
or retrieve objects that have no immediate relevance, 
only to discover later that they played a crucial role in 
some enigmatic gambit. By the same token, they might 
stumble across some alien operation that has no obvi-
ous purpose, earning bitter enmity for their disruption 
of plans they never knew existed.
In either case, there should usually be some way 
for the PCs to discover alien motivations, in the case 
that they actually care. It can be prohibitively difficult 
to negotiate with such beings without understanding 
their desires, and parties with little appetite for combat 
may be frustrated if they find their would-be count -
er-parties acting in an impenetrably obscure way. Some 
adventures might revolve heavily around the challenge 
of understanding an alien power’s true goals and the 
steps they’re willing to take to achieve them.
===== PAGE 213 =====
alien Player CharaCterS •209 
alIen Player CharaCTers
If a GM decides to allow players to play members of an 
alien race, she’s going to need to do a little extra work. 
Each alien race is represented by a focus; to become 
a member of that race, the player spends their initial 
focus pick on choosing that origin. They then get the 
natural benefits of belonging to that alien species.
As a general rule, the GM should pick two of the 
following benefits to make up an alien’s origin focus, or 
three if a couple of them are relatively minor perks. If 
the Vree-Tak are a Proud Warrior Race of aliens, they 
might have both an Aptitude for Violence, for example, 
and an Origin Skill related to combat. 
It’s also possible to apply particular weaknesses to 
an alien species as compared to a human baseline. Such 
weaknesses are rarely a significant game-balance con-
sideration for PCs, however, as it’s common for players 
to choose such alien races and then select classes and 
roles that are unhindered by the species’ flaws. If you 
want to use a flaw as a game-balance tool in a species, 
make sure it’s broad enough to hinder a wide range of 
concepts, and not just disqualify a few roles.
Aptitude for Violence
All members of this species are good at hurting things. 
They gain a +1 bonus to their normal attack bonus. 
Thus, a 1st level alien Expert would have an attack bo-
nus of +1 instead of +0, and a 1st level Warrior would 
begin with a +2 bonus.
Environmental Native
As a minor perk, the alien is able to survive in a relative-
ly common hostile environment, such as underwater, 
in hard vacuum, amid lethal radiation, or so forth. If the 
alien requires this environment, it’s no net benefit at all.
Innate Ability
All members of this species have one or more natural 
abilities beyond those possessed by humans. Perfect vi-
sion in the dark, tracking by scent, wireless tech inter-
facing, a lack of need for food and water, or some other 
talent might apply. As a quick inspiration, you can look 
at the equipment or cyberware list and give them the 
natural use of 2-3 items. Optionally, you might give 
them an ability equivalent to a single psionic technique, 
plus one point of Effort to fuel it if needed.
Natural Defenses
The creature has a hard shell or sharp talons. The alien 
has a base Armor Class of 15 plus half their character 
level, rounded up. If you give them body weaponry 
such as claws or fangs, have it equivalent to a medi -
um advanced weapon. Weaponry alone is a very small 
advantage, since it’s so easy to acquire otherwise, so 
you might not count this as a benefit if all you give a 
creature is a sharp set of teeth.
Origin Skill
All members of the species are particularly good at 
something. They might all be capable warriors, have 
unique technical aptitude, be persuasive speakers, or 
otherwise have a shared knack. Receive an appropriate 
skill as a bonus. Warrior-type races might be allowed 
to pick from either Punch, Shoot, or Stab.
Psychic Aptitude
These aliens are all psychically gifted. The PC must 
either be a Psychic or take the Partial Psychic class op-
tion from the Adventurer class. Their maximum Effort 
score is increased by one point.
Shapeshifting
The alien is either an amoeboid blob that can ma -
nipulate objects with extruded pseudopods and flow 
through small spaces, or it can actually mimic other 
species or objects. The former trait is a minor benefit 
at best, but the latter one might be sufficient to mimic 
biopsionic shapeshifting, or might have a more restrict-
ed range of possible shapes.
Strong Attribute
All members of the species are strong, fast, tough, clev-
er, perceptive, or charming by human standards. Pick 
an attribute appropriate to the alien; that attribute 
gains a +1 bonus to its modifier, up to a maximum of 
+3. Thus, an alien from an exceptionally strong species 
with a Strength score of 10 would have a Strength mod-
ifier of +1 instead of +0.
Tough
The alien is big, or hardy, or made of unusually durable 
biological components. Whenever they roll their hit 
dice to determine their maximum hit points, the first 
die they roll always counts as the maximum. Thus, a 
first level Warrior alien would always start with 8 hit 
points. When rolling hit points at second level, they’d 
count their first die as 8 and roll on from there. Further 
hit dice that roll a 1 are rerolled.
Unusual Movement Mode
The alien can fly under normal gravity conditions, or 
make short-range teleportation hops, or can climb 
sheer walls as if they were flat. Whatever the details, 
they can use their Move action to travel unusually.
Useful Immunity
The alien is impervious to some threat that’s relatively 
common. A significant or common immunity, such as 
against bullets, lasers, edged melee weapons or the like 
would be a major benefit, while immunity to minor 
threats such as toxins, diseases, radiation, or falling 
damage might only qualify as a minor perk.
===== PAGE 214 =====

===== PAGE 215 =====
FACTIONS
Interstellar merchant combines, tyrannical planetary 
empires, sinister cults of eugenic perfection… groups 
such as these all have a role to play in Stars Without 
Number. Such organized, motivated groups are known 
as factions, and this chapter describes ways in which a 
GM can use them to further events in a sector. Player 
characters that attain sufficient power and fame might 
even establish their own factions, and the rules below 
give ways to handle inter-faction fighting and the ad-
vancement of each group’s goals.
Using Factions in Your Game
The faction system in Stars Without Number is intended 
to provide a GM with a constant stream of background 
activity, adventure hooks, and visible setting reactions 
to PC actions. It is an optional system, one that a GM 
can take or leave as their own campaign suggests, but 
it can provide an interested GM with tools to simplify 
the business of running the campaign’s background.
The faction system is not meant to be a stand-
alone game that doesn’t require GM involvement. It’s 
not balanced for equivalence between sides, isn’t de -
signed to incentivize optimal play choices, and some 
situations will certainly require a GM to referee them. 
The system is, however, built to produce the kind of 
output that a working GM is likely to find most useful.
Some GMs will have no use for a formalized fac -
tion system. These people feel most comfortable sim-
ply dictating the outcome of conflicts and ambitions 
among the assorted groups and organizations in their 
campaign. When two groups clash, the results will be 
determined by what the GM thinks is most reasonable.
This is a perfectly valid way of doing things, and 
indeed, when a GM decides how some off-stage orga-
nization interacts with a fully-statted faction they’re 
going to have to make calls like that anyway. Yet the 
disadvantages of such a method are twofold.
First, it lacks surprise for the GM. By definition, 
the reasonable thing always happens, and even the 
occasional randomizer tossed in produces results that 
are to some degree predictable to the GM. History and 
current affairs are full of wildly unlikely-seeming out -
comes, however, and sometimes the GM can benefit 
by seeing a genuinely shocking result percolate out of 
some conflict. Even in the absence of the adventure 
hooks such surprises create, not knowing exactly how 
her campaign is going to shake out helps keep a GM 
interested in events.
Second, an unstructured system has few prompts 
to goad a GM into thinking of unexpected interactions 
between factions. A GM simply provided with a list of 
NPC groups to write events for will tend to reach for 
the interactions and outcomes that are foremost in their 
mind, implicitly going along with assumptions about 
how things should play out. If instead they’re handed a 
slow-burn struggle between a militant terrorist group 
with fanatical zealots for an asset and a eugenics-loving 
religion with a crack team of lawyers, they’re going to 
think somewhat harder about how these two factions 
might play out their conflict, and will get results that 
don’t automatically feed their assumptions.
One of the easiest ways to use the faction system 
is as a news chyron for your campaign. After each fac -
tion turn, you can boil down events to a few sentences 
apiece and hand them to your players at the start of the 
next gaming session, letting them know what’s on the 
news channels and underground gossip boards of your 
campaign. If your players get excited about one of the 
events, you can dedicate the next downtime between 
sessions to brewing up an adventure related to their 
efforts at involvement.
Another use of the system is as a way to formalize 
the setting reaction to PC actions. If the last adven -
ture involved the PCs utterly discrediting the leader 
of a political party you’re using as a faction, you might 
scratch off the Demagogue asset that the party had that 
represented that leader. A quick scribble gives you the 
news crawl next session telling the PCs that the leader 
had decided to step down to spend more time with 
her family.
The factions you write up are not the only organi-
zations and groups in your world, but they are the ones 
the PCs are most likely to care about or the ones most 
pertinent to their current activities. You don’t need to 
keep the same factions active all the time; if the cam-
paign shifts focus halfway across the sector, you can 
simply freeze the local factions until the PCs get back in 
their zone of relevance. If you have the spare time and 
effort, you might even keep them running, letting the 
PCs discover how things shook out when and if they 
ever get back to that region of space.
In time, the PCs themselves can start creating their 
own factions to contend with rivals and seek influence 
on a scale impractical for a lone wanderer. While PC 
factions use all the same rules and faction turn actions 
as NPC ones, they have the tremendous advantage of 
being the focus of a veteran adventuring party’s helpful 
interest. Almost anything that can be accomplished by 
faction turn actions can be done more quickly by the 
appropriate PC adventures.
This, of course, is an easy way for a GM to let the 
players write their own adventure content. So long as 
the PCs care about their pet factions or allied groups, 
their own ambitions and desire to help will practically 
create whole sessions worth of adventure outlines for 
you. Important NPCs in rival groups will become hated 
nemeses, hostile assets will become the targets of their 
bad intent, and the players will constantly be on the 
lookout for ways to augment their allies. For the sake 
of your own time and effort, you should let them.
===== PAGE 216 =====
21 2• faCtionS, aSSetS, and turnS
faCTIons, asseTs, and Turns
A faction is any group that you intend to use as an im-
portant actor in the sector. In theory, any organization 
could qualify as a faction; every planetary government, 
business, religion, or club could be described with the 
rules given here. Still, that kind of exhaustive catalog -
ing is neither practical nor profitable. Faction status 
should be reserved for those organizations that will do 
things important to the PCs or the background world. 
You should not bother creating more factions for your 
game than you are actually using at that moment. Save 
your effort for the groups that count.
It may be necessary to turn an organization into a 
faction in the course of play. If the PCs suddenly take a 
deep interest in a eugenic cult they recently faced on the 
jungle moon of Perihelion, it might be useful for the 
GM to turn the group into a formal faction, the better 
to understand how the PCs might injure it and what 
resources the cult might have to fight back. Or it might 
be that the PC group’s interstellar trading cartel faction 
tries to topple a world’s tyrannical government, thus 
making it worthwhile to define the tyrant’s resources.
As a general rule, you shouldn’t have more than 
five or six factions at the start of your campaign, and 
fewer is quite possible. Fewer than three tend to make 
for too much stability, however, and might not gen -
erate enough activity to make for interesting news 
reports and adventure hooks. Possible factions in a 
campaign might include criminal groups, local reli -
gions, planetary governments, political movements, 
terrorist organizations, noble houses, or any other 
band that might conceivably be someone the players 
care about or some group that might possibly hire or 
oppose the PCs. 
Defining a Faction
Factions have attributes consisting of six statistics, a 
homeworld, and one or more tags.
Hit points measure a faction’s cohesion, morale, 
and group unity. The higher a faction’s hit points, the 
harder it is to break it up. A faction that loses hit points 
has lost cohesion somehow, either through the death 
of leadership, the demoralization of members, or the 
rise of fractious power blocs inside its structure. A fac-
tion needs time to recover from hit point damage. A 
faction’s maximum hit points are based on its Force, 
Cunning, and Wealth, as given later in the chapter.
Force rating is the faction’s general aptitude at ap-
plying physical violence, measured on a scale ranging 
from 1 to 8. A rating of 1 implies an organization with 
little or no aptitude for physical coercion, while a rating 
of 8 might be appropriate for a regional hegemon with 
a powerful, expansionist military. A high Force rating 
doesn’t necessarily mean that the faction has much in 
the way of a standing army, but it does mean that the 
faction can think clearly about the use of force and is 
accustomed to military reasoning. Governments tend 
to have high Force ratings to represent police forces 
and military structures. Terrorist groups, mercenary 
bands, and other organizations that rely on brute vio-
lence also tend to have high Force ratings.
Cunning rating reflects the faction’s skills at es -
pionage, infiltration, internal security, and covert 
manipulation of other groups. A rating of 1 implies a 
completely visible faction with no resources for resist-
ing infiltration, while a rating of 8 implies a faction of 
Illuminati unknown to all but a handful of paranoid 
conspiracy-mongers with tendrils of influence reach -
ing to the farthest star in the sector. Eugenics cults, ter-
rorist groups, spy agencies, and some religious groups 
tend to favor a good Cunning score.
Wealth rating indicates the faction’s commercial, 
scientific, and industrial resources. A Wealth score of 
1 means that the faction has little in the way of income 
or investments, no dedicated manufacturing facilities, 
and no laboratories or researchers available. A Wealth 
score of 8 is appropriate for some system-spanning 
merchant empire or the combine that runs the pretech 
manufactories of an untouched factory world.
FacCreds are a measure of the faction’s general 
wealth and resources, spent to purchase and main -
tain assets or carry out faction operations. A FacCred 
doesn’t necessarily represent a certain sum of credits so 
much as it represents logistics capability, available re-
sources, and managerial focus. A faction on a primitive 
world may not have a single credit to its name, but its 
command of a legion of laborers and the food supplies 
necessary to feed them are a vast store of FacCreds all 
the same. All the credits in a sector do no good if they 
can’t be effectively translated into a useful asset.
Factions also accumulate experience points. They 
gain these points from accomplishing goals, with the 
larger goals earning them correspondingly more expe-
rience points. Once enough experience is accumulated 
the faction can spend it to improve a rating. The higher 
the rating, the more experience is necessary to raise it. 
It’s vastly more difficult to go from Force 7 to 8 than 
from Force 1 to 2.
The faction’s homeworld represents the location 
of its core leadership and support. Factions can always 
purchase assets and take actions on their homeworld, 
even if they lack any other assets there. By the same 
token, an enemy can always launch attacks against the 
faction on their homeworld if the enemy is able to 
move in its own assets.
Tags are special traits that relate to the faction’s 
nature or special aptitudes. A cabal of rebel conspira -
tors might have the Secretive tag, which gives a bonus 
to resisting certain attacks, or Deep Roots, which gives 
them a bonus to operations on their homeworld. Most 
factions have one or two tags.
===== PAGE 217 =====
faCtionS, aSSetS, and turnS •213 
Faction Assets
Aside from the six statistics, faction also possess assets. 
Assets are facilities, contacts, trained units of specialists, 
or other specific objects, places, or groups of value. A 
regiment of postech infantry is an asset, as is a pretech 
manufactory, a master assassin, or an interstellar ship-
ping company.
Assets require certain ratings to support. A fleet 
of capital warships isn’t going to be useful to a faction 
with Force 3 no matter how much wealth the faction 
has. It just doesn’t have the infrastructure and institu -
tional mindset to use such an asset effectively.
Assets have hit points much like factions do. An as-
set reduced to zero hit points by an attack is destroyed; 
either physically ruined, hopelessly scattered, totally 
demoralized, or lost to a rival buyer. Asset hit points 
can be regained with time for repair, reorganization, or 
culling members suborned by other powers.
Assets have a purchase cost and sometimes a main-
tenance cost, paid in FacCreds. The first turn that a 
faction fails to pay the maintenance cost of an asset, it 
becomes unavailable for use. If the maintenance cost 
isn’t paid the next turn, the asset is lost.
Assets often have an Attack. When an asset is used 
to strike at another faction, the attack entry is used to 
determine what rating is attacked and the amount of 
hit point damage that is done by a successful hit. An 
asset without an Attack entry can’t be used to initiate 
a strike at an enemy faction.
A Counterattack line indicates the damage an asset 
does to an unsuccessful attacker. If an attacking asset 
misses its strike against the target, the target’s Counter-
attack entry damage is done. An asset without a Coun-
terattack entry does no damage to a failed attacker. It’s 
quite possible to have an asset with no Attack but a 
powerful Counterattack, making it useless at offense 
but very dangerous to assault.
Assets have a type, such as “Special Forces”, “Mil -
itary Unit”, “Facility”, “Starship” or the like. This type 
is mostly relevant when factions wish to upgrade an 
asset, or some special tag applies only to assets of a 
certain type.
Assets have a location, usually the planet on which 
they were purchased, though it might also be a deep-
space habitat, a particular moon, or some other general 
geographical location. Assets cannot be used against 
different locations unless they are first transported 
there, usually by means of a logistical asset.
Most assets also require a particular tech level to 
purchase. They can be transported to worlds with low-
er tech levels, but they must be purchased on a planet 
with a sufficient level of technology.
A faction may own no more assets of a particular 
type than they have points in the relevant rating. Thus, 
a faction with Force 3 can own three Force assets. In a 
pinch, a faction can exceed this total, but each asset over 
the maximum costs an additional FacCred in mainte -
nance each turn.
The Faction Turn
Faction actions are divided up by turns. As a rule of 
thumb, a faction turn happens once per month, or once 
after each adventure. Turns might happen more or less 
often depending on the GM’s preferred pace of events. 
Each faction can usually take one action per turn.
At the beginning of each turn, roll a die that’s no 
smaller than the number of factions you have. Thus, if 
you’ve got six factions in the sector, roll a d6. If you’ve 
got nine, roll a d10, and so forth. Whatever number 
comes up is the faction that acts first; thus, if you roll 
a 4, the fourth faction on your list acts first. Then the 
one after it, and the one after that, and so forth, rolling 
over the top of the list when necessary.
At the beginning of each turn, a faction gains Fac-
Creds equal to half their Wealth rating rounded up plus 
one-quarter of their total Force and Cunning ratings, 
rounded down. Any maintenance costs must be paid 
at the beginning of each turn. Assets that cannot be 
maintained are unusable; an asset that goes without 
maintenance for two consecutive rounds is lost. A fac-
tion cannot voluntarily choose not to pay maintenance.
If a faction has no goal at the start of a turn, they 
may pick a new one. If they wish to abandon a prior 
goal, they may do so, but the demoralization and con-
fusion costs them that turn’s FacCred income and they 
may perform no other action that turn.
At the end of each faction turn, the GM should 
translate the turn’s events into a few lines of rumor or 
news that can be related to the PCs. A successful attack 
by the Lawyers of the Bright Dawn Guild on the Peri-
helion government’s Union Toughs might be reported 
as “Neohuman rights activists on Perihelion applaud 
the election of Parminder Smith to the leadership of the 
government-sponsored Transit Workers Union. Miss 
Smith is a strong supporter of neohuman research and 
legal emancipation.”
Acting During A Turn
Factions can take several different types of actions, 
though generally only one action per turn. The list 
provided consists of the usual actions a faction might 
find useful; you should feel free to allow variations on 
the list depending on the particular situation. PC ad -
ventures always exist outside of the faction turn econ-
omy. If you run an adventure involving the PC group’s 
destruction of the Sorority of the Golden Flame’s secret 
laboratories on a volcanic planetoid, then the faction’s 
asset is simply destroyed, with no chance of resisting.
A faction can only take one type of action per round, 
but they can perform that action on as many worlds as 
they wish. A faction that selects the Attack action, for 
example, can launch attacks on multiple worlds, while 
one that selects the Use Asset Ability action can use the 
special abilities of any or all assets they possess. This 
limit on the type of action allowed in a round tends 
to slow down events, allowing for the more gradual 
development of situations in play.
===== PAGE 218 =====
214• faCtion aCtionS
faCTIon aCTIons
The following list of actions includes the most com -
mon activities a faction might choose to perform. The 
GM should feel free to add new action types, or allow 
alternate choices if a faction wishes to do something 
that doesn’t quite fit the list below. As a rule, a faction 
should only be able to do one thing per turn, but should 
be able to do that same thing with any or all assets.
Attack: Attacking is the chief way by which a faction 
assaults a rival’s assets and organizational struc -
ture. A successful attack can damage or destroy an 
enemy asset, or even damage the leadership and 
cohesion of an enemy faction. It’s up to the GM 
or players to describe an attack and its methods.
Attacks can only be launched against known 
assets. If a rival has stealthed assets on a world, 
they cannot be targeted for an attack until they’ve 
been discovered by a faction’s intelligence agents. 
Attacks can only be launched against assets on the 
same world as the attacker.
To launch an attack, the attacker selects one 
or more of their own assets and targets a rival fac-
tion with assets on the same world. One at a time, 
each attacking asset is matched against a defending 
asset chosen by the defender. Each attacking asset 
can attack only once per turn, though a defending 
asset can defend as many times as the defender 
wishes, assuming it can survive multiple conflicts.
Once matched, the attacker rolls 1d10 and 
adds the relevant attribute for the asset. For exam-
ple, a military unit’s Attack might add the faction’s 
Force rating to the attack roll, while a cyberninja 
unit might add the faction’s Cunning to the attack 
roll. The defender then rolls 1d10 and adds the 
attribute that the attack targets. In the instance of 
the military unit, this might be an attack against 
Force, causing the defender to add their Force 
rating to the roll, while defending against the 
cyberninjas might require adding the defender’s 
Cunning rating. The Attack line of the attacking 
asset indicates which attribute to add to the attack 
roll and which to add to the defense roll.
If the attacker’s roll exceeds the defender’s roll, 
the attack is a success. The defending asset suffers 
damage as given on the Attack line of the attacking 
asset. If the defender has a Base of Influence on the 
world, the defender may opt to let the damage by-
pass the asset and hit the Base of Influence instead, 
causing damage to it and the faction hit points. If 
the asset or Base of Influence is reduced to zero 
hit points, it is lost.
If the attacker’s roll is less than the defender’s 
roll, the attack fails. The defending asset can apply 
whatever damage their Counterattack line indi -
cates to the attacking asset. If the defending asset 
has no Counterattack line, the attacker suffers no 
consequences for the failed attack.
A tie on the roll results in both Attack and 
Counterattack succeeding. Both attacker and de -
fender take damage as indicated.
Buy Asset: The faction buys one asset on their home -
world or another planet on which they have a 
Base of Influence. These assets take time to as -
semble, and can neither attack, defend, nor grant 
their special benefits until the beginning of the 
faction’s next turn. The faction must have a suf -
ficient rating to buy an asset, and the planet must 
have a tech level sufficient to support the asset’s 
creation. Only one asset can be purchased by a 
faction per turn.
Change Homeworld: A faction can move to a different 
homeworld, if they have a Base of Influence on 
the destination planet. This action takes one turn, 
plus one more for each hex of distance between 
the old homeworld and the new. During this time 
the faction can initiate no actions.
Expand Influence: The faction buys a Base of Influence 
asset on a planet on which they have at least one 
other asset. The faction then rolls 1d10+Cunning 
rating against similar rolls by every other faction 
on the planet. Any of the others that equal or 
beat the faction’s roll may make a free immedi -
ate Attack action against the Base of Influence if 
they wish. Other assets present on the planet may 
defend against the attack as normal. The Base of 
Influence cannot be used until the beginning of 
the faction’s next turn.
To buy a Base of Influence, the purchaser pays 
one FacCred for every hit point the base has, up 
to a maximum equal to the faction’s maximum 
hit points. Bases with few hit points are relatively 
peripheral outposts, easy to dislodge but cheap to 
erect. Bases with many hit points are significant 
strongholds that would hurt the faction badly to 
lose but are much harder to eliminate.
Factions may use this action to buy additional 
hit points for a Base of Influence, paying one addi-
tional FacCred up to the maximum HP allowed. It 
is possible to decrease a base’s hit points with the 
action as well, albeit without refunds. The base on 
a faction’s homeworld cannot be shrunk this way.
Refit Asset: Change one asset to any other asset of the 
same type. If the new asset is of a more expensive 
type, pay the difference. The asset must be on a 
planet that allows the purchase of the new asset. 
Turning a militia squad into elite skirmishers 
requires a tech level 4 world and governmental 
permission, for example. A refitted asset is un -
able to attack or defend until the beginning of the 
faction’s next turn.
===== PAGE 219 =====
faCtion aCtionS •215 
Repair Asset/Faction: Heal damage to an asset or faction. 
For one FacCred, an asset heals points of damage 
equal to the faction’s score in its ruling attribute. 
More damage can be healed in this single action, 
but the cost of repair increases by one FacCred 
for each further amount repaired- two FacCreds 
for the second amount healed, three FacCreds for 
the third amount healed, et cetera. If used to heal 
a faction, the faction regains hit points equal to 
the rounded average of its highest and lowest at-
tribute ratings. This healing cannot be hurried by 
additional spending. Use of this action allows the 
faction to heal as many different assets as it wishes.
Sell Asset: Gain half the FacCred cost of the asset, 
rounded down.
Seize Planet: The faction seeks to become the ruling 
body of a world. The faction must destroy all 
unstealthed assets on the planet belonging to fac-
tions who oppose their attempt before they can 
successfully take control. If all the assets cannot be 
destroyed in one turn, the faction must continue 
the attempt next turn until either successful or all 
of their own assets on that planet have been de -
stroyed or have left the planet. No other actions 
can be taken in the meanwhile. Once all resistance 
has been crushed, the attacker must maintain at 
least one unstealthed asset on the world for three 
turns. If successful, they gain the Planetary Govern-
ment tag for the world.
Use Asset Ability: Use the special abilities of one or 
more assets, such as the transport ability of logis -
tics assets, or the intelligence-gathering abilities 
of spy assets.
Handling Special Cases
When in doubt, a GM should simply make a judgment 
based on their own best sense of the situation. Despite 
this general case, there are a few more particular situ -
ations that come up often enough to bear some specific 
guidance in handling them.
Sometimes, a ground unit will choose to attack 
a starship unit, or some other unit that seems to be 
beyond their reach. As a general rule, you should allow 
this, and simply decide how it was that the ground unit 
was able to cause problems for the starships. Maybe 
they subverted officers, or sabotaged support facilities, 
or drove logistical suppliers out of business.
Some assets require the permission of the plane -
tary government to raise them on a particular world or 
move them into that world’s system. The necessity of 
this will depend on how advanced the planetary gov-
ernment is and how direct the contact. A TL2 planetary 
government probably wouldn’t even notice the arrival 
of a capital fleet in their star system, let alone be able 
to do anything to prevent it. Even so, native lawyers, 
bribed offworlder officials, and hired mercenaries 
might still be able to harass a force the locals couldn’t 
bar from entering their territory.
Locations are considered general to a specific star 
system rather than a particular world. The faction’s 
marketers might be operating out of the planetary cap-
ital, but for purposes of location, they’re as much in the 
system as a Scavenger Fleet floating around the rim. 
Getting shuttles to and from wherever they need to go 
inside the system is not a problem for most factions.
Sometimes two factions will want to merge for 
some reason. The efficiency of this will depend on how 
much the factions like each other and how close they 
are in function; give this propinquity a rating from 1, 
for two factions that hate each other and don’t do simi-
lar things at all, to 9, for two factions that are in perfect 
synchrony. Use 6 for two factions of average similarity. 
Whenever you need to see how well the merger went, 
roll a compatibility check; 1d10 versus this number. If 
the roll is equal or less, it worked, and if it’s higher, the 
merger didn’t work so well in that regard.
Now determine the Force, Wealth, and Cunning 
ratings for the new faction. For each one, roll a com-
patibility check; on a success, use the higher of the two 
factions’ scores, while on a failure, use the lower one.
For each asset, roll a compatibility check; on a suc-
cess, the asset belongs to the new faction, on a failure, 
it’s forcibly sold. FacCreds are totaled between the two 
factions, and the merged faction gets all the Bases of 
Influence each originally had. Pick a new goal as well. 
If the faction has assets its new ratings can’t support, it 
keeps them, but can’t use Repair Asset on them.
PC adventures always overrule faction die rolls. 
If the PCs undertake an adventure which results in 
the crippling or destruction of a hostile faction’s asset, 
that asset is destroyed without any need for dice. In 
the same vein, if they swoop in to rescue some asset 
that the dice declared was ruined and undertake an ad-
venture that plausibly salvages the situation, that asset 
comes back into existence. The faction system is built 
to help create adventure hooks, not shut them down.
By the same token, if a PC adventure seems to 
plausibly create an asset for a faction, then that should 
be credited to the group. It is entirely in your interest 
as a GM to let the players plot out adventure goals and 
find motivation in helping a faction. Every adventure 
they spend helping or harming a faction is one more 
hook of engagement with the campaign world and one 
less adventure idea you need to come up with.
If your factions are too quiet with a lack of inter-
esting conflict among them, don’t hesitate to create that 
conflict. A sector full of turtling factions that hide out 
and painstakingly build their resources doesn’t make 
for much engagement, so insert a personal grudge or 
add a gold-rush opportunity.
When a faction buys an asset, they are not neces -
sarily creating something ex nihilo. They might have 
always had that particular resource, but are only now 
mobilizing it effectively. A planetary government with 
no military assets doesn’t necessarily lack an army, it 
just lacks an army that is useful to its current goals.
===== PAGE 220 =====
216• buying and uSing aSSetS
buyIng and usIng asseTs
Assets can be normally purchased on any world that has 
a Base of Influence and sufficient tech level to support 
their creation. In a few cases, however, acquiring an 
asset requires more than just FacCreds and a planet.
Starship-type assets cannot be purchased on a 
world with less than several hundred thousand inhab-
itants unless they can explain how the ships are being 
provided or supported by another power. Planets with 
very small populations lack such major infrastructure.
Some assets require the permission of a planetary 
government in order to purchase them or move them 
onto the planet. This is not a formality; the standing 
government’s forces can physically disrupt any attempt 
to recruit the asset on their world, or shoot it down in 
its vulnerable entry phase. Whether or not this permis-
sion will be extended will usually depend on the fac -
tion’s relationship with a planet’s government, though 
bribes of 1d4 FacCreds can occasionally suffice. Under 
no conditions will a government willingly permit the 
entry of assets powerful enough to overthrow them.
Planetary governments cannot prevent the land -
ing of assets without the permission-needed quality. 
Such assets are too unthreatening and nondescript to 
alert them until after they’ve already been formed or 
have landed. Of course, there is nothing stopping them 
from attacking these assets either directly or indirectly 
should they feel threatened.
Only one asset can be purchased per turn by a 
given faction, and assembling it takes time. The asset 
can neither attack, defend, nor give any special benefits 
until the beginning of the buyer’s next turn.
Using Faction Assets
As its action for the turn, a faction can choose to use the 
special actions of one or more assets. They can trigger 
these special abilities in any order, but each form of as-
set must be used all at the same time; you cannot trigger 
Heavy Drop Assets to move a Monopoly asset onto a 
world, activate the Monopoly ability to siphon cash, 
and then use another Heavy Drop Asset to move the 
Monopoly back offworld. All Heavy Drop Assets must 
be finished before Monopolies can be triggered, and 
so forth. Unless specified otherwise, all asset targets 
must be in the same stellar system with the acting assets.
In some cases, assets are called to make a test 
against another faction, such as a Cunning vs. Wealth 
test. For these tests, the acting asset’s faction rolls 1d10 
and adds their score in the acting attribute, while the 
target faction rolls 1d10 and adds their score in the de-
fending attribute. If the actor rolls higher than the de-
fender, the action is successful. Certain tags may grant 
a faction extra dice for these rolls, in which case the 
highest d10 out of those rolled is used. These tests do 
not count as attacks, and no damage or counterattacks 
are triggered.
Bases of Influence
Bases of Influence are special assets, and use certain 
special rules. A faction cannot buy assets on a world 
without a Base of Influence, though it can move assets 
purchased elsewhere onto the planet, and it can always 
buy assets on its homeworld even if its Base of Influ-
ence there is destroyed. Of course, that assumes it still 
has a Base of Influence somewhere else.
First, a faction can only ever have one Base of In-
fluence on a world at a time. Bases of Influence cannot 
be moved once in place. Bases of Influence cannot be 
purchased with a Buy Asset action. They can only be 
put in place with an Expand Influence action. Bases of 
Influence have a sale value of zero FacCreds.
The cost of a Base of Influence is equal to its max-
imum hit points, which can be up to the owning fac -
tion’s maximum hit points. Bases of Influence do not 
count against a faction’s maximum assets.
Damage done to a Base of Influence is also done 
directly to a faction’s hit points. If a Base of Influence 
is brought below zero hit points, the overflow damage 
is not counted against the owning faction’s hit points.
As a consequence, a faction must decide how heav-
ily to invest in a particular Base of Influence. A minor 
foothold on a world consisting of a base with few hit 
points is cheap and risks limited harm to the faction 
should it be destroyed, but it’s also more vulnerable to 
being wiped out by a rival group.
It’s quite possible for a faction to be effectively 
destroyed by smashing enough heavily-invested Bases 
of Influence on other worlds. While the homeworld’s 
Base might be in perfect condition, the faction has so 
badly overextended itself in failed expansion that it 
can no longer sustain itself as a going concern. The 
resources and personnel that the homeworld needed 
to import are no longer available, and the credits and 
effort spent on the now-destroyed Bases are wasted. 
The backlash from this can be ruinous to any faction.
Every faction also has a homeworld. A homeworld 
is always automatically equipped with a Base of Influ-
ence with maximum hit points. If a faction moves its 
homeworld to a planet that already has a Base of Influ-
ence, the base on the new homeworld has its hit points 
set to the maximum possible and the homeworld’s Base 
of Influence swaps in the hit point value that the des-
tination world’s base originally had.
===== PAGE 221 =====
faCtion goalS •21 7 
faCTIon goals
Factions usually have motivations and goals beyond 
simple existence. To grow, a faction needs to accom -
plish goals that are in line with their leadership’s pur-
poses. Successful achievement of these goals helps the 
faction grow in strength and influence.
A faction can pursue one goal at a time. Once a goal 
is successfully attained, the faction may select a new 
one at the beginning of their next turn or delay until a 
good opportunity arises. If a faction chooses to aban -
don a goal, the demoralizing effect of it and the waste 
of preparations costs them that turn’s FacCred income, 
and they cannot perform any other action that turn.
A faction that successfully accomplishes a goal 
gains experience points equal to the goal’s difficulty. 
This experience may be saved, or spent at the beginning 
of any turn to increase the Force, Cunning, or Wealth 
ratings of a faction. Optionally, the GM might allow a 
faction to buy a new tag if their deeds justify it.
It’s the GM’s choice as to what might constitute 
an appropriate goal for a faction, but below are some 
potential goals and the difficulties attached to each.
Military Conquest: Destroy a number of Force assets of 
rival factions equal to your faction’s Force rating. 
Difficulty is 1/2 number of assets destroyed.
Commercial Expansion: Destroy a number of Wealth 
assets of rival factions equal to your faction’s 
Wealth rating. Difficulty is 1/2 number of assets 
destroyed.
Intelligence Coup: Destroy a number of Cunning assets 
of rival factions equal to your faction’s Cunning 
rating. Difficulty is 1/2 number of assets destroyed.
Planetary Seizure: Take control of a planet, becoming 
the legitimate planetary government. Difficulty 
equal to half the average of the current ruling 
faction’s Force, Cunning, and Wealth ratings. If 
the planet somehow lacks any opposing faction to 
resist the seizure, it counts as Difficulty 1.
Expand Influence: Plant a Base of Influence on a new 
planet. Difficulty 1, +1 if the attempt is contested 
by a rival faction.
Blood the Enemy: Inflict a number of hit points of dam-
age on enemy faction assets or bases equal to your 
faction’s total Force, Cunning, and Wealth ratings. 
Difficulty 2.
Peaceable Kingdom: Don’t take an Attack action for four 
turns. Difficulty 1.
Destroy the Foe: Destroy a rival faction. Difficulty equal 
to 1 plus the average of the faction’s Force, Cun-
ning, and Wealth ratings.
Inside Enemy Territory: Have a number of stealthed 
assets on worlds with other planetary govern -
ments equal to your Cunning score. Units that 
are already stealthed on worlds when this goal is 
adopted don’t count. Difficulty 2.
Invincible Valor: Destroy a Force asset with a mini -
mum purchase rating higher than your faction’s 
Force rating. Thus, if your Force is 3, you need to 
destroy a unit that requires Force 4 or higher to 
purchase. Difficulty 2.
Wealth of Worlds: Spend FacCreds equal to four times 
your faction’s Wealth rating on bribes and influ-
ence. This money is effectively lost, but the goal 
is then considered accomplished. The faction’s 
Wealth rating must increase before this goal can 
be selected again. Difficulty 2.
Raising Faction Stats
Faction attributes can be raised at the beginning of 
each turn, if enough experience points are available. 
The cost of raising a faction attribute rises as the rating 
rises. As a faction’s ratings improve, it becomes harder 
to destroy, and gains additional maximum hit points.
The maximum hit points of a faction are equal to 4 
plus the experience point cost of the highest attributes 
in Force, Cunning, and Wealth they have attained. 
For example, a faction with Force 3, Cunning 2, and 
Wealth 2 has a maximum hit point total of 4 + 4 + 2 
+ 2 = 12 hit points. A brand-new faction with Force 1, 
Cunning 2, and Wealth 1 has a maximum hit point total 
of 4 + 1 + 2 + 1 = 8 hit points.
Experience points spent by factions differ from 
those gained by PCs in that they are lost when they in-
crease an attribute. Once a faction spends 4 XP to raise 
Force from 2 to 3, for example, those points are lost, 
and 6 more must be spent to raise Force from 3 to 4.
Rating XP Cost Hit Point Value
1 - 1
2 2 2
3 4 4
4 6 6
5 9 9
6 12 12
7 16 16
8 20 20
===== PAGE 222 =====
21 8• Cunning aSSetS
CunnIng asseTs
Base of Influence: This asset is special, and is required 
for purchasing or upgrading units on a particular 
world. Any damage done to a Base of Influence is 
also done to a faction’s hit points. The cost of a 
Base of Influence equals its maximum hit points, 
which can be any number up to the total maxi -
mum hit points of its owning faction. A faction’s 
bases of influence don’t count against their maxi-
mum assets. A Base of Influence can only be pur-
chased with the Expand Influence action.
Blackmail: Selectively degrade the effectiveness of an 
asset. Any attempt to attack or defend against 
Blackmail loses any bonus dice earned by tags.
Boltholes: Equipped with a number of postech inno -
vations to make cleaning them out a costly and 
dangerous pursuit. If a faction Special Forces 
or Military Unit asset on the same planet as the 
Boltholes suffers damage sufficient to destroy it, 
it is instead set at 0 HP and rendered untouchable 
and unusable until it is repaired to full strength. 
If the Boltholes are destroyed before this happens, 
the asset is destroyed with them.
Book of Secrets: Exhaustively cataloged psychometric 
records on important and influential local figures, 
allowing uncanny accuracy in predicting their ac-
tions. Once per turn, a Book of Secrets allows the 
faction to reroll one die for an action taken on 
that world or force an enemy faction to reroll one 
die. This reroll can only be forced once per turn, 
no matter how many Books of Secrets are owned.
Covert Shipping: Quiet interstellar asset transport. Any 
one Special Forces unit can be moved between any 
worlds within three hexes of the Covert Shipping 
at the cost of one FacCred.
Covert Transit Net: Facilities web an area of space with 
a network of smugglers and gray-market freighter 
captains. As an action, any Special Forces assets 
can be moved between any worlds within three 
hexes of the Covert Transit Net.
Cracked Comms: A cryptographic asset for the inter -
ception and deciphering of enemy communica -
tions. Friendly fire can be induced with the right 
interference. If the Cracked Comms succeeds in 
defending against an attack, it can immediately 
cause the attacking asset to make an attack against 
itself for normal damage or counterattack results.
Cyberninjas: Outfitted with the latest in personal 
stealth cyberware, cyberninjas are designed to 
avoid all but the most careful scans.
Demagogues: Popular leaders of a particular faith or 
ideology that can be relied upon to point their 
followers in the direction of maximum utility.
False Front: This asset allows a faction to preserve more 
valuable resources. If another asset on the planet 
suffers enough damage to destroy it, the faction 
can sacrifice the false front instead to nullify the 
killing blow. 
Informers: Minions that lace a planet’s underworld, 
watchful for intruders. They can choose to Attack 
a faction without specifying a target asset. On a 
successful Cunning vs. Cunning attack, all Steal -
thed assets on the planet belonging to that faction 
are revealed. Informers can target a faction even if 
none of their assets are visible on a world; at worst, 
they simply learn that there are no stealthed assets.
Lobbyists: Usable to block the governmental permis -
sion that is sometimes required to buy an asset or 
transport it into a system. When a rival faction 
gains permission to do so, the Lobbyists can make 
an immediate Cunning vs. Cunning test against 
the faction; if successful, the permission is with -
drawn and cannot be re-attempted until next turn. 
Organization Moles : These can subvert and confuse 
enemy assets, striking to damage their cohesion.
Panopticon Matrix: These facilities weave braked-AI 
intelligence analysts into a web of observation 
capable of detecting the slightest evidence of in -
truders on a world. Every rival Stealthed asset on 
the planet must succeed in a Cunning vs. Cunning 
test at the beginning of every turn or lose their 
Stealth. The owner also gains an additional die 
on all Cunning attacks and defenses on that planet.
Party Machines: Political blocks control particular cities 
or regions… blocks that are firmly in control of 
the faction. Each turn, a Party Machine provides 
1 FacCred to its owning faction.
Popular Movements: A planet-wide surge of enthusiasm 
for a cause controlled by the faction. This sup -
port pervades all levels of government, and the 
government always grants any asset purchase or 
movement requests made by the faction.
Saboteurs: Minions rained in launching strikes against 
enemy operations. An asset attacked by saboteurs 
cannot apply any Use Asset Ability action until the 
start of the attacking faction’s next turn. This ap-
plies whether or not the attack was successful.
Seditionists: These asset sap a target’s loyalty and will to 
obey. For a cost of 1d4 FacCreds, the Seditionists 
can attach themselves to an enemy asset. Until 
they attach to a different asset or no longer share 
the same planet, the affected asset cannot attack. 
If the asset is destroyed, the Seditionists survive.
Seductresses: They and their male equivalents subvert 
the leadership of enemy assets. As an action, a Se-
ductress can travel to any world within one hex. 
As an attack, a Seductress does no damage, but an 
asset that has been successfully attacked imme -
diately reveals any other Stealthed assets of that 
faction on the planet. Only Special Forces units 
can attack a Seductress.
===== PAGE 223 =====
Cunning aSSetS •21 9 
Asset HP Cost TL Type Attack Counter Note
Cunning 1
Smugglers 4 2 4 Starship Cunning vs. Wealth, 1d4 damage None A
Informers 3 2 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, special None A, S
False Front 2 1 0 Logistics Facility None None S
Base of Influence * * 0 Special None None S
Cunning 2
Lobbyists 4 4 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, special None S
Saboteurs 6 5 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d4 damage None S
Blackmail 4 4 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, 1d4+1 damage None S
Seductress 4 4 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, special None A, S
Cunning 3
Cyberninjas 4 6 4 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage None -
Stealth - 2 0 Tactic None None S
Covert Shipping 4 8 4 Logistics Facility None None A, S
Cunning 4
Party Machine 10 8 0 Logistics Facility Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage 1d6 damage S
Vanguard Cadres 12 8 3 Military Unit Cunning vs. Cunning, 1d6 damage 1d6 damage -
Tripwire Cells 8 12 4 Special Forces None 1d4 damage A, S
Seditionists 8 12 0 Special Forces None None A
Cunning 5
Organization Moles 8 10 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage None
Cracked Comms 6 14 0 Tactic None Special S
Boltholes 6 12 4 Logistics Facility None 2d6 damage S
Cunning 6
Transport Lockdown 10 20 4 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, special None S
Covert Transit Net 15 18 4 Logistics Facility None None A
Demagogue 10 20 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d8 damage 1d8 damage -
Cunning 7
Popular Movement 16 25 4 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6 damage 1d6 damage S
Book of Secrets 10 20 4 Tactic None 2d8 damage S
Treachery 5 10 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Cunning, Special None S
Cunning 8
Panopticon Matrix 20 30 5 Logistics Facility None 1d6 damage. S
A “P” special code indicates a need for planetary governmental permission to raise or transport in the asset. “A” means 
that the asset can perform a special action, and “S” indicates that the asset has a special feature or cost.
Smugglers: Men and women skilled in extracting per-
sonnel. For one FacCred, the smugglers asset can 
transport itself and/or any one Special Forces unit 
to a planet up to two hexes away.
Stealth: Not an asset, per se, but a special quality that 
can be purchased for another Special Forces asset 
on the planet. An asset that has been Stealthed 
cannot be detected or attacked by other factions. 
If the unit normally requires the permission of a 
planetary government to be moved onto a planet, 
that permission may be foregone. An asset loses 
its Stealth if it is used to attack or defend.
Transport Lockdown: These techniques involve selec -
tive pressure on local routing and shipping com-
panies. On a successful Cunning vs. Cunning at-
tack against a rival faction, the rival faction cannot 
transport assets onto that planet without spending 
1d4 FacCreds and waiting one turn.
Treachery: Traitors can attack an enemy asset. On a 
successful attack, the Treachery asset is lost, 5 Fac-
Creds are gained, and the targeted asset switches 
sides to join the traitor’s faction, even if the faction 
does not otherwise have the attributes necessary.
Tripwire Cells: These observers are alert to the arriv -
al of stealthed units. Whenever a stealthed asset 
lands or is purchased on a planet with tripwire 
cells, the Cells make an immediate Cunning vs. 
Cunning attack against the owning faction. If suc-
cessful, the asset loses its stealth.
Vanguard Cadres: Followers of the movement are in -
spired sufficiently to take up arms and fight on 
behalf of their leadership.
===== PAGE 224 =====
220• forCe aSSetS
forCe asseTs
Base of Influence: This asset is special, and is required 
for purchasing or upgrading units on a particular 
world. Any damage done to a Base of Influence is 
also done to a faction’s hit points. The cost of a 
Base of Influence equals its maximum hit points, 
which can be any number up to the total maxi -
mum hit points of its owning faction. A faction’s 
bases of influence don’t count against their maxi-
mum assets. A Base of Influence can only be pur-
chased with the Expand Influence action.
Beachhead Landers: A collection of short-range, 
high-capacity spike drive ships capable of moving 
large numbers of troops. As an action, the asset 
may move any number of assets on the planet, in-
cluding itself, to any world within one hex at a cost 
of one FacCred per asset moved.
Blockade Fleets: A ragtag lot of corsairs, pirates, priva-
teers, and other deniable assets. When they suc -
cessfully Attack an enemy faction asset, they steal 
1d4 FacCreds from the target faction as well. This 
theft can occur to a faction only once per turn, 
no matter how many blockade fleets attack. As an 
action, this asset may also move itself to a world 
within one hex.
Capital Fleets: The pride of an empire, this is a collec -
tion of massive capital warships without peer in 
most sectors. Capital fleets are expensive to keep 
flying, and cost an additional 2 FacCreds of main-
tenance each turn. As an action, they may move 
to any world within three hexes of their current 
location. Planetary government permission is re-
quired to raise a capital fleet, but not to move one 
into a system.
Counterintel Units: These security units specialize in 
code breaking, internal security, and monitoring 
duties. They can crack open enemy plots long be-
fore they have time to come to fruition.
Cunning Traps: This asset covers all the myriad strata -
gems of war, from induced landslides to spreading 
local diseases.
Deep Strike Landers: These advanced transport ships 
are capable of moving an asset long distances. As 
an action, any one non-Starship asset, including 
itself, can be moved between any two worlds 
within three hexes of the deep strike landers, at a 
cost of 2 FacCreds. This movement can be done 
even if the local planetary government objects, al-
beit doing so is usually an act of open war.
Elite Skirmishers: These lightly-equipped troops are 
trained for guerrilla warfare and quick raids.
Extended Theater: These facilities allow for transport -
ing assets long distances. As an action, any one 
non-Starship asset, including itself, can be moved 
between any two worlds within two hexes of the 
extended theater, at a cost of 1 FacCred.
Gravtank Formations: These tank formations are com-
posed of advanced postech gravtank units that are 
capable of covering almost any terrain and crack-
ing even the toughest defensive positions.
Guerrilla Populace: Such assets reflect popular support 
among the locals and a cadre of men and women 
willing to fight as partisans.
Hardened Personnel: These are the employees and sup-
port staff of the faction that have been trained in 
defensive fighting and equipped with supply cach-
es and hardened fallback positions.
Heavy Drop Assets: These craft allow for the transport 
of resources from one world to another. As an 
action, any one non-Starship asset, including this 
one, may be moved to any world within one hex 
for one FacCred.
Hitmen: Crudely-equipped thugs and assassins with 
minimal training that have been aimed at a rival 
faction’s leadership.
Integral Protocols: A complex web of braked-AI sup -
ported sensors and redundant security checks used 
to defeat attempts to infiltrate an area. They can 
defend only against attacks versus Cunning, but 
they add an additional die to the defender’s roll.
Militia Units: Groups of lightly-equipped irregular 
troops with rudimentary military training but no 
heavy support.
Planetary Defenses: Massive mag cannons and gravi -
tic braker gun arrays designed to defend against 
starship bombardments and repel unauthorized 
landing. Planetary defenses can only defend 
against attacks by Starship-type assets.
Postech Infantry: The backbone of most planetary 
armies, these well-trained soldiers are usually 
equipped with mag weaponry and combat field 
uniforms, and have heavy support units attached.
Pretech Infantry: The cream of the stellar ground 
forces, elite troops kitted out in the best pretech 
weaponry and armor available, with sophisticated 
heavy support weaponry integral to the unit.
Pretech Logistics: These assets represent caches, smug-
glers, or internal research and salvage programs. 
As an action, a pretech logistics asset allows the 
owner to buy one Force asset on that world that 
requires up to tech level 5 to purchase. This asset 
costs half again as many FacCreds as usual, round-
ed up. Only one asset can be purchased per turn.
Psychic Assassins: Combat-trained psychics equipped 
with advanced pretech stealth gear and psitech 
weaponry. Psychic assassins automatically start 
Stealthed when purchased.
Security Personnel: Standard civilian guards or police-
men, usually equipped with nonlethal weaponry 
or personal sidearms.
===== PAGE 225 =====
Eliminating Force Assets
It’s important to remember that a disabled or dam-
aged Force asset hasn’t necessarily been blown to 
pieces on a battlefield. When thinking of ways that 
a conflict might have harmed such an asset, re -
member that demoralization, confusion, subver -
sion, and simple lack of upkeep might all cripple 
the effectiveness of an asset, or even destroy it as 
an effective force without rebuilding as expensive 
as buying a fresh asset. A navy with spacemanship 
skills so neglected as to constantly run ships into 
each other is just as worthless to its owning faction 
as a fleet of smoking wrecks, and the only damage 
done there was to the organization’s focus.
forCe aSSetS •221 
Space Marines: Heavily-armored specialist troops 
trained for ship boarding actions and opposed 
landings. As an action, they can move to any world 
within one hex of their current location, whether 
or not the planetary government permits it.
Strike Fleets: Forces composed of frigate or cruiser-class 
vessels equipped with space-to-ground weaponry 
and sophisticated defenses against light planetary 
weaponry. As an action, they can move to any 
world within one hex of their current location.
Zealots: Members of the faction so utterly dedicated 
that they are willing to launch suicide attacks or 
hold positions to the death. Zealots take 1d4 dam-
age every time they launch a successful attack or 
perform a counterattack.
Asset HP Cost TL Type Attack Counter Note
Force 1
Security Personnel 3 2 0 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 1d3+1 damage 1d4 damage -
Hitmen 1 2 0 Special Forces Force vs. Cunning, 1d6 damage None -
Militia Unit 4 4 3 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 1d6 damage 1d4+1 damage P
Base of Influence * * 0 Special None None S
Force 2
Heavy Drop Assets 6 4 4 Facility None None A
Elite Skirmishers 5 5 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 2d4 damage 1d4+1 damage P
Hardened Personnel 4 4 3 Special Forces None 1d4+1 damage -
Guerrilla Populace 6 4 0 Military Unit Force vs. Cunning, 1d4+1 damage None -
Force 3
Zealots 4 6 0 Special Forces Force vs Force, 2d6 damage 2d6 damage S
Cunning Trap 2 5 0 Tactic None 1d6+3 damage -
Counterintel Unit 4 6 4 Special Forces Cunning vs Cunning, 1d4+1 damage 1d6 damage -
Force 4
Beachhead Landers 10 10 4 Facility None None A
Extended Theater 10 10 4 Facility None None A
Strike Fleet 8 12 4 Starship Force vs. Force, 2d6 damage 1d8 damage A
Postech Infantry 12 8 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 1d8 damage 1d8 damage P
Force 5
Blockade Fleet 8 10 4 Starship Force vs. Wealth, 1d6 damage * None S
Pretech Logistics 6 14 0 Facility None None A
Psychic Assassins 4 12 4 Special Forces Cunning vs. Cunning, 2d6+2 damage None S
Force 6
Pretech Infantry 16 20 5 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 2d8 damage 2d8+2 damage P
Planetary Defenses 20 18 4 Facility None 2d6+6 damage * S
Gravtank Formation 14 25 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force, 2d10+4 damage 1d10 damage P
Force 7
Deep Strike Landers 10 25 4 Facility None None A
Integral Protocols 10 20 5 Facility None 2d8+2 damage * S
Space Marines 16 30 4 Military Unit Force vs. Force 2d8+2 damage 2d8 damage A
Force 8
Capital Fleet 30 40 4 Spaceship Force vs. Force, 3d10+4 damage 3d8 damage A, S
A “P” special code indicates a need for planetary governmental permission to raise or transport in the asset. “A” means 
that the asset can perform a special action, and “S” indicates that the asset has a special feature or cost.
===== PAGE 226 =====
222• Wealth aSSetS
WealTh asseTs
Bank Assets: Once per turn, the faction can ignore one 
cost or FacCred loss imposed by another faction. 
This does not require an action. Multiple bank as-
sets allow multiple losses to be ignored.
Base of Influence: These follow the standard rules for 
Bases of Influence.
Blockade Runners: These starship captains excel at 
transporting goods through unfriendly lines. As 
an action, a blockade runner can transfer itself or 
any one Military Unit or Special Forces to a world 
within three hexes for a cost of two FacCreds. 
They can even move units that would otherwise 
require planetary government permission to enter.
Commodities Brokers: They substantially lessen the 
cost of large-scale investments by timing mate -
rials purchases properly. As an action, the owner 
of a commodities broker can roll 1d8; that many 
FacCreds are subtracted from the cost of their next 
asset purchase, down to a minimum of half nor-
mal price, rounded down.
Franchise: This asset reflects a deniable connection 
with a local licensee for the faction’s goods and 
services. When a Franchise successfully attacks a 
enemy asset, the enemy faction loses one FacCred 
(if available), which is gained by the Franchise’s 
owner. This loss can happen only once a turn, no 
matter how many Franchises attack.
Freighter Contract: A special link with heavy shipping 
spacers. As an action, the faction may move any 
one non-Force asset, including this one, to any 
world within two hexes at a cost of one FacCred.
Harvesters: These gather the natural resources of a 
world, whether ore, biologicals, or other unpro -
cessed goods. As an action, the Harvesters’ owning 
faction may roll 1d6. On 3+, gain one FacCred.
Hostile Takeover: This asset can seize control of dam -
aged and poorly-controlled assets. If a Hostile 
Takeover does enough damage to destroy an as-
set, the target is instead reduced to 1 hit point and 
acquired by the Hostile Takeover’s owning faction.
Laboratory: The lab allows a world to make hesitant 
progress in tech. The presence of a Laboratory 
allows assets to be purchased on that world as if it 
had Tech Level 4.
Lawyers: Sophists in immaculate suits or charismatic 
tribal skalds, lawyers have the ability to tie an ene-
my up in the coils of their own internal rules, dam-
aging assets with confusion and red tape. Lawyers 
cannot attack or counterattack Force assets.
Local Investments: These give the faction substantial in-
fluence over the commerce on a world. Any other 
faction that tries to buy an asset on that planet 
must pay one extra FacCred. This money is not 
given to the investments’ owner, but is lost. This 
penalty is only applied once.
Marketers: Deployed to confuse enemy factions into 
untimely investments. As an action, the marketers 
may test Cunning vs. Wealth against a rival fac -
tion’s asset. If successful, the target faction must 
immediately pay half the asset’s purchase cost, 
rounded down, or have it become disabled and 
useless until this price is paid.
Medical Center: Salvage and repair damaged assets. 
Once between turns, if a Special Forces or Mili -
tary Unit asset on the world is destroyed, the fac-
tion may immediately pay half its purchase cost 
to restore it with one hit point. Any Repair Asset 
action taken on that world costs one less FacCred 
for Special Forces and Military Units.
Mercenaries: Groups of well-equipped, highly-trained 
soldiers willing to serve the highest bidder. Mer-
cenaries have a maintenance cost of one FacCred 
per turn. As an action, Mercenaries can move to 
any world within one hex of their current location. 
To purchase or move a Mercenary asset to a planet 
requires government permission.
Monopoly: An open or tacit stranglehold on certain vital 
businesses or resources on a world. As an action, 
owners of a monopoly may force one other faction 
with unstealthed assets on that world to pay them 
one FacCred. If the target faction can’t pay, they 
lose one asset of their choice on the world.
Postech Industry: As an action, the owning faction can 
roll 1d6 for a Postech Industry asset. On a 1, one 
FacCred is lost, on a 2-4 one FacCred is earned, 
and a 5-6 returns two FacCreds. If money is lost 
and no resources are available to pay it, the Pos-
tech Industry is destroyed.
Pretech Manufactories: Rare, precious examples of 
functioning pretech industrial facilities, retrofit -
ted to work without the benefit of specialized psy-
chic disciplines. As an action, the owning faction 
can roll 1d8 for a Pretech Manufactory, and gain 
half that many FacCreds, rounded up.
Pretech Researchers: A highly versatile team of research 
and design specialists capable of supporting lim -
ited pretech… as long as they’re adequately fund-
ed. Any world with Pretech Researchers on it is 
treated as tech level 5 for the purpose of buying 
Cunning and Wealth assets. Pretech researchers 
have a maintenance cost of 1 FacCred per turn.
R&D Departments: These allow the smooth extension 
of wealth-creation and industrial principles to the 
farthest reaches of the faction’s operations. A fac-
tion with an R&D department may treat all plan-
ets as having tech level 4 for purposes of buying 
Wealth assets.
Scavenger Fleets: These rag-tag armadas bring enor -
mous technical and mercantile resources to their 
patrons, along with a facility with heavy guns. As 
===== PAGE 227 =====
Wealth aSSetS •223 
Asset HP Cost TL Type Attack Counter Note
Wealth 1
Franchise 3 2 2 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d4 damage 1d4-1 damage S
Harvesters 4 2 0 Facility None 1d4 A
Local Investments 2 1 2 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d4-1 damage None S
Base of Influence * * 0 Special None None S
Wealth 2
Freighter Contract 4 5 4 Starship Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d4 damage None A
Lawyers 4 6 0 Special Forces Cunning vs. Wealth, 2d4 damage 1d6 damage S
Union Toughs 6 4 0 Military Unit Wealth vs. Force, 1d4+1 damage 1d4 damage
Surveyors 4 4 4 Special Forces None 1d4 damage A, S
Wealth 3
Postech Industry 4 8 4 Facility None 1d4 damage A
Laboratory 4 6 0 Facility None None S
Mercenaries 6 8 4 Military Unit Wealth vs. Force, 2d4+2 damage 1d6 damage A, S, P
Wealth 4
Shipping Combine 10 10 4 Facility None 1d6 damage A
Monopoly 12 8 3 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 1d6 damage 1d6 damage S
Medical Center 8 12 4 Facility None None S
Bank 8 12 3 Facility None None S
Wealth 5
Marketers 8 10 0 Tactic Cunning vs. Wealth, 1d6 damage None A
Pretech Researchers 6 14 4 Special Forces None None S
Blockade Runners 6 12 4 Starship None 2d4 damage A
Wealth 6
Venture Capital 10 15 4 Facility Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d6 1d6 damage A
R&D Department 15 18 4 Facility None None S
Commodities Broker 10 20 0 Special Forces Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d8 damage 1d8 damage A
Wealth 7
Pretech Manufactory 16 25 5 Facility None None S
Hostile Takeover 10 20 4 Tactic Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d10 damage 2d8 damage S
Transit Web 5 15 5 Facility Cunning vs. Cunning, 1d12 damage None S
Wealth 8
Scavenger Fleet 20 30 5 Starship Wealth vs. Wealth, 2d10+4 damage 2d10 damage.
A “P” special code indicates a need for planetary governmental permission to raise or transport in the asset. “A” means 
that the asset can perform a special action, and “S” indicates that the asset has a special feature or cost.
an action, a Scavenger Fleet can be moved to any 
world within three hexes. Scavenger Fleets cost 2 
FacCreds a turn in maintenance.
Shipping Combine: Transport large amounts of equip -
ment and personnel between worlds. As an action, 
the combine may move any number of non-Force 
assets, including itself, to any world within two 
hexes at a cost of one FacCred per asset.
Surveyors: Explore potential resource and investment 
options on worlds. The presence of a Surveyor 
crew allows one additional die to be rolled on 
Expand Influence actions. As an action, a surveyor 
crew can be moved to any world within two hexes.
Transit Web: These facilities allow almost effortless re-
location of all assets. For one FacCred, any num-
ber of non-starship Cunning or Wealth assets may 
be moved between any two worlds within three 
hexes of the Transit Web. This may be done freely 
on the owner’s turn so long as the fee can be paid, 
and using the ability doesn’t require an action.
Union Toughs: These bruisers don’t much like scabs and 
management, and they’re willing to take the fac -
tion’s word on which people are which. They’re 
lightly armed and poorly trained, but they can in-
filtrate to perform sabotage.
Venture Capital: This asset grows resources out of 
seemingly nowhere, harvesting the best of entre-
preneurship for the faction’s benefit. As an action, 
venture capital can be tapped. 1d8 is rolled; on a 1, 
the asset is destroyed, while on a 2-3 one FacCred 
is gained, 4-7 yields two FacCreds and 8 grants 
three FacCreds.
===== PAGE 228 =====
224• faCtion tagS
faCTIon Tags
Most factions have some unique quality about them, 
some trait that distinguishes them from other factions 
of similar resources. Whether a particularly fanatical 
band of ideological crusaders or an ancient order of 
pacifistic scientists, faction tags allow a GM to give a 
group a few special tricks of their own.
A faction should generally be given one tag, or two 
at the most for particularly versatile organizations. The 
exception is the Planetary Government tag, which can 
be acquired– and lost– multiple times to reflect the 
faction’s seizure of new worlds. Factions tags do not 
normally change without some drastic and organiza -
tion-shaping event.
Colonists
This faction is a fresh colony on an otherwise largely 
untouched planet. It is this brave band of pioneers that 
will tame the world’s wild forces and bring forth a bet-
ter life for those who come after.
Effect: This faction has all the benefits of the Planetary 
Government tag for its homeworld, as no other 
government exists on a fresh colony. The faction’s 
homeworld is also treated as if it had at least tech 
level 4. Colonies with fewer than 100,000 citi -
zens lack the necessary industrial infrastructure 
to build Spaceship-type assets.
Deep Rooted
This faction has been part of a world’s life for time out 
of mind. Most natives can hardly imagine the world 
without this faction’s presence, and the traditional pre-
rogatives and dignities of the group are instinctively 
respected.
Effect: This faction can roll one additional d10 when 
defending against attacks on assets on their home-
world. If the faction ever changes homeworlds, 
this tag is lost.
Eugenics Cult
The forbidden maltech secrets of advanced human ge-
netic manipulation are known to this faction, and they 
use them with gusto. Slave-engineered humanoids and 
“deathless” leadership are just two of the more common 
alterations these unstable scientists undertake.
Effect: Eugenics Cultists can buy the Gengineered 
Slaves asset; it’s an asset requiring Force 1 with 
the statistics of 6 HP, 2 FacCred cost, tech level 4 
required, with an Attack of Force vs. Force/1d6 
damage and a Counterattack of 1d4 damage. Once 
per turn, the Eugenics Cult can roll an extra d10 
on an attack or defense by a Gengineered Slaves 
asset, regardless of the stat being used. Gengi -
neered Slaves can count as either a Military Unit 
or Special Forces, determined when the cult first 
creates a specific asset.
Exchange Consulate
This faction is either led through an Exchange Con -
sulate or has close ties with that pacifistic society of 
bankers and diplomats. The sophisticated economic 
services they provide strengthen the faction.
Effect: When the faction successfully completes a 
“Peaceable Kingdom” Goal, they may roll 1d6; on 
a 4+, they gain a bonus experience point. Once 
per turn, the faction may roll an extra d10 when 
defending against a Wealth attack.
Fanatical
The members of this faction just don’t know when to 
quit. No matter how overmatched, the members will 
keep fighting to the bitter end- and occasionally past it.
Effect: The faction always rerolls any dice that come up 
as 1. This zealousness leaves them open at times, 
however; they always lose ties during attacks.
Imperialists
This faction nurses wild dreams of controlling the sec-
tor, whether out of an impulse to bring their local cul-
ture and technology to less fortunate worlds or simple 
lust for dominion. They excel at defeating planetary 
defenses and standing armies.
Effect: This faction may roll an extra d10 for attacks 
made as part of a Seize Planet action.
Machiavellian
This faction’s meat and drink is intrigue, its members 
delighting in every opportunity to scheme. It may be 
a secret cabal of hidden masters or the decadent court 
of a fallen stellar empire, but its membership has for-
gotten more of treachery than most others ever learn.
Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an additional 
d10 when making a Cunning attack.
Mercenary Group
The faction sells its services to the highest bidder, and 
is an extremely mobile organization. Vast amounts of 
men and material can be moved interstellar distances 
in just a few months.
Effect: All faction assets gain the following special abil-
ity: As an action, the asset may move itself to any 
world within one hex.
Perimeter Agency
This faction is or is closely tied to an Agency of the 
enigmatic Perimeter organization. Originally orga -
nized by the Terran Mandate to detect and contain 
maltech outbreaks until Mandate fleet resources could 
be dispatched, the Perimeter retains numerous ancient 
override codes for pretech security protocols.
Effect: Once per turn, the faction may roll an addi -
tional d10 when making an attack against an asset 
===== PAGE 229 =====
faCtion tagS •225 
that requires tech level 5 to purchase. The faction 
may roll an extra die when making a test to detect 
Stealthed assets.
Pirates
This faction is a scourge of the spacelanes, driving up 
the cost of shipping and terrorizing merchant captains 
without pity. They steal and refit ships with vicious 
ingenuity, cobbling together space armadas out of the 
leavings of their prey.
Effect: Any movement of an asset onto a world that has 
a Base of Influence for this faction costs one extra 
FacCred, paid to this faction.
Planetary Government
This faction is the legitimate government of a planet. 
Rebel groups and rival factions may have assets on the 
planet, but control over the instruments of the state 
is firmly in this faction’s hands. The faction may rule 
openly, or it may simply have an inexorable grasp on 
the existing authorities.
Effect: The faction’s permission is required to buy or 
import those assets marked as needing govern -
ment permission. This tag can be acquired multi-
ple times, once for each planet the faction controls.
Plutocratic
This faction prizes wealth, and its membership strives 
constantly to expand and maintain personal fortunes. 
Perhaps it is a ruling council of oligarchs or a star-span-
ning trade cartel.
Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an additional 
d10 when making a Wealth attack.
Preceptor Archive
This faction is or has close ties to a Preceptor Archive 
a place of learning operated by the learned Preceptors 
of the Great Archive. These Archives are peaceful in-
stitutions dedicated to the spread of practical knowl -
edge and useful engineering to the wider cosmos. Their 
large numbers of educated personnel make advanced 
equipment more practical for deployment.
Effect: Purchasing an asset that requires tech level 4 or 
more costs one fewer FacCred than normal. The 
Preceptor Archive may also take the special action 
“Teach Planetary Population”, costing 2 FacCreds 
and allowing them to roll 1d12 for one world. On 
a 12, the world’s tech level permanently becomes 
4 for the purposes and purchases of this faction.
Psychic Academy
Most significant factions are capable of employing psy-
chics, but this faction can actually train their own. They 
excel at precise and focused application of the psionic 
disciplines, and can get far more out of their available 
psychic resources than other factions.
Effect: This faction can provide psionic mentor train-
ing to qualified psychics. Once per turn, this fac -
tion can also force a rival faction to reroll any one 
d10, whether or not they’re involved in the roll.
Savage
Whether a proud tribe of neoprimitives struggling 
against the material limits of their world or a pack of 
degenerate tomb world cannibals, this faction is accus-
tomed to surviving without the benefits of advanced 
technology and maximizing local resources.
Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an extra die 
when defending with an asset that requires tech 
level 0 to purchase.
Scavengers
This faction might live within the wreckage of a tomb 
world, salvage the castoffs of some decadent plea -
sure-world or ply the ruins of an orbital scrapyard. 
Whatever their territory, this faction knows how to 
find worth amid seemingly useless trash.
Effect: Whenever the faction destroys an asset or has 
one of their assets destroyed, they gain 1 FacCred.
Secretive
This faction is marked by elaborate protocols of secre -
cy and misdirection. It may be split up into numerous 
semi-autonomous cells, or consist largely of trained es-
pionage professionals. Finding the assets of such a fac-
tion can often be more difficult than destroying them.
Effect: All assets purchased by this faction automatical-
ly begin Stealthed. See the list of Cunning assets 
for details on Stealth.
Technical Expertise
The faction is staffed by large numbers of expert en -
gineers and scientists. They can turn even the most 
unpromising labor pool into superb technicians.
Effect: This faction treats all planets on which they 
have a Base of Influence as if they were at least 
tech level 4. They can build Starship-type assets 
on any world with at least ten thousand occupants.
Theocratic
The faction is fueled by the fierce certainty that God 
is with them- and with no one else. The tight and 
occasionally irrational obedience that pervades the 
organization makes it difficult to infiltrate or subvert 
effectively.
Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an extra d10 
when defending against a Cunning attack.
Warlike
There are factions with a military orientation, and then 
there are factions that just really love killing things. 
Whether or not this faction has developed sophisticat-
ed military resources and techniques, the membership 
is zealous in battle and has a positive taste for fighting.
Effect: Once per turn, this faction can roll an additional 
d10 when making a Force attack.
===== PAGE 230 =====
226• faCtionS in your CamPaign
faCTIons In your CamPaIgn
To create a faction, first decide on the scale of the orga-
nization. Many factions are restricted to a single world, 
and even the most impressive sector empire rarely 
exerts direct control over more than a dozen worlds. 
Place the faction’s homeworld and locate any Bases of 
Influence it might have on other worlds. A few words 
beside each Base describing the form it takes can be 
handy in later planning out adventures with the faction.
Next, prioritize the faction’s attributes, deciding 
the order in which they focus on Force, Cunning, and 
Wealth. Minor factions should have a 4 in their most 
important attribute, established planetary govern -
ments should have a 6, and regional hegemons should 
have an 8. Their second-most important attribute is 
one less than their primary, and their tertiary attribute 
is three less. You can calculate the faction’s hit points 
from that, but normally minor powers will have 15 HP, 
major powers will have 29 HP, and sector hegemons 
will have 49 HP. Their off-world Bases of Influence 
normally have a maximum HP equal to half that.
Give minor powers one asset in their primary at-
tribute and one asset in a different attribute. Give major 
powers two assets in their primary attribute, and two 
assets in different attributes, and give regional hege -
mons four assets in their primary and four in others. 
Place these assets on the worlds occupied by the faction.
Select an appropriate faction tag for the organiza-
tion, one fitting their special focus and origins. If the 
faction has direct governmental control over one or 
more worlds, add Planetary Government tags to them.
Finally, select a Goal for the faction. For your ini-
tial three or four sector factions, try to pick goals that 
will put them in conflict with each other. If the factions 
you make are content to hide from the world and get 
along in peace and quiet, they’re unlikely to be terribly 
useful as patrons or enemies for the PC group, unless 
you intend to enlist the PCs as defenders of some be-
leaguered group of innocents.
Creating PC Factions
Eventually, it’s likely that a PC is going to accumulate 
the necessary power and influence to start their own 
faction. Often around 9th level, a PC has gained enough 
renown and competence that others will want to serve 
them, and they can choose to parlay that into a faction 
of their own. This may happen at earlier levels, depend-
ing on whether or not the PC has made it a significant 
priority to develop their own faction.
Newly-founded factions are fragile, vulnerable 
things. They start with a score of 2 in their primary 
attribute and 1 in the others, 8 hit points, and one asset 
in their primary attribute. The GM may select one fac-
tion tag appropriate to the new organization’s nature.
The exact details of a PC’s new faction will de -
pend largely on what the character did to form it. A PC 
who organizes a colonial expedition to an uninhabited 
world will end up with a faction very different from 
that of a PC that starts her own psychic academy. In 
general, PCs have to actively work to create their fac -
tion. It does not simply arrive as their natural birthright.
Adventures and Factions
The actions of adventurers fall outside the faction turn, 
but the consequences of their escapades can translate 
into the loss or acquisition of FacCreds, assets, or fac -
tion hit points. If the players come up with a scheme to 
strike at the leadership of the Brotherhood of the New 
Man, success or failure isn’t determined according to 
Force attacks or Cunning defenses. Success is deter -
mined by the outcome of the adventure itself, and the 
group’s ability to overcome the security and obfusca -
tion that surrounds these mad gengineers.
The amount of damage done or benefit given to a 
faction by a group’s adventures should be substantial, at 
least as much as could be accomplished with a faction 
turn. It may not be possible to bring down an interstel-
lar empire by precision strikes and subversion, but the 
players should be able to see concrete effects from their 
successes. At the very least, the newslines at the end of 
each faction turn should include public commentary on 
the visible consequences of their actions.
Some players will want to take advantage of the 
resources of their factions in the course of their ad -
ventures, either bringing along troops or specialists, or 
utilizing faction assets on a personal level. This should 
be permitted as a general matter; there’s not much fun 
in being a colonial governor if you can’t even get a 
corporal’s guard of bodyguards to look after you. Fac-
tion equipment should also be available in reasonable 
amounts. Subordinates are not adventurers, however, 
and while they will perform their duties diligently and 
well, they won’t willingly take the kind of risks that 
adventurers often relish. Faction assets should be an 
advantage and a tool for the PCs rather than a crutch.
It may come up that a character wants to with -
draw credits from his faction, or donate loot won in the 
course of their adventuring. FacCreds translate poorly 
into normal credits, as they often represent resources 
that don’t liquidate easily into cash. The GM should feel 
free to prohibit directly withdrawing cash from a fac-
tion if a PC comes to rely on it too heavily. Otherwise, 
one FacCred will usually translate into about 100,000 
credits worth of cash, with substantially larger returns 
if used to make investments, or build things.
Characters can give up to 1d4 x 100,000 credits 
to a faction in any one turn, with each 100,000 credits 
becoming 1 FacCred. Any more than this in one turn is 
wasted due to accounting inefficiency, and the faction 
will need to spend a full turn processing the donation 
before it becomes FacCreds.
===== PAGE 231 =====
examPle faCtionS •227 
eXamPle faCTIons
A GM doesn’t always have time to sort out the details 
of every faction that might be needed. A group might 
decide to attack the planetary government of a world 
that wasn’t important or interesting enough to merit 
the effort to define its governmental faction during 
sector creation, for example. The following sample 
factions can be pulled and used for such places as nec-
essary. Where appropriate, you can add the Planetary 
Government tag for legitimate world governments.
Colony World
Thinly-populated worlds with limited infrastructure 
tend to have weak colonial governments concerned 
chiefly with issues of basic survival rather than expan-
sion or intrigue.
Attributes: Force 4, Cunning 3, Wealth 1
Hit Points: 15
Assets: Guerrilla Populace/Force 2 and Saboteurs/Cun-
ning 2
Tags: Colonists
Lost World
Primitive and barbaric by the standards of the space go-
ing worlds, a lost world lacks the technical resources of 
their neighbors, but may well have substantial advan -
tages in population and cultural cohesion depending on 
the world’s habitability.
Attributes: Force 4, Cunning 1, Wealth 3
Hit Points: 15
Assets: Zealots/Force 3, Harvesters/Wealth 1
Tags: Savage
Backwater Planet
Perhaps this world was important once, but disaster, 
ennui, or the Scream has left it a sleepy planet disinter-
ested in the wider galaxy. Most worlds with ordinary 
levels of technology in a sector will fit this template.
Attributes: Force 6, Cunning 3, Wealth 5
Hit Points: 29
Assets: Postech Infantry/Force 4, Planetary Defenses/
Force 6, Informers/Cunning 1, Bank/Wealth 4
Tags: Deep Rooted
Zealous Faith
This religious organization is a powerful force in the 
sector, likely with major congregations on several 
worlds. 
Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 6, Wealth 5
Hit Points: 29
Assets: Demagogue/Cunning 6, Organization Moles/
Cunning 5, Zealots/Force 3, Marketers/Wealth 5
Tags: Theocratic
Regional Hegemon
This world is the mightiest military power in the sector 
and leads a half-dozen neighboring worlds in a “volun-
tary confederation” that it ever seeks to expand.
Attributes: Force 8, Cunning 5, Wealth 7
Hit Points: 49
Assets: Space Marines/Force 7, Planetary Defenses/
Force 6, Blockade Fleet/Force 5, Extended The -
ater/Force 4, Pretech Manufactory/Wealth 7, 
Shipping Combine/Wealth 4, Tripwire Cells/
Cunning 4, Cyberninjas/Cunning 3
Tags: Imperialists
Mercantile Combine
A star-spanning consortium of merchants might oper-
ate out of one particular world, but their final loyalty 
is always to their credit balance.
Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 5, Wealth 6
Hit Points: 29
Assets: Venture Capital/Wealth 6, Shipping Combine/
Wealth 4, Hardened Personnel/Forces 2, Black -
mail/Cunning 2
Tags: Plutocratic
Eugenics Cult
Some people are born to rule- literally. These eugenics 
cults believe that superior breeds of humanity can be 
successfully engineered, and that good genetic back -
ground legitimizes rule over less “advanced” humans. 
Such cults are widely loathed, but the experimental 
medical treatment they offer to those who can find 
them makes unwilling converts of some.
Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 6, Wealth 5
Hit Points: 29
Assets: Boltholes/Cunning 5, Demagogue/Cunning 6, 
Laboratory/Wealth 3, Gengineered Slaves/Force 
1
Tags: Eugenics Cult
Rebel Freedom Fighters
Even in the most tyrannical corners of the galaxy, the 
human heart yearns for freedom. These factions spring 
up in the shadow of oppressive governments. For each 
one that is crushed, a new one rises in time.
Attributes: Force 3, Cunning 4, Wealth 1
Hit Points: 15
Assets: Seditionists/Cunning 4, Zealots/Force 3
Tags: Secretive
===== PAGE 232 =====
228• examPle of faCtion Play
an eXamPle of faCTIon Play
The GM has just finished brewing up her initial sector. 
She has a rough sketch of the worlds, she’s fleshed out 
the planet where the initial play session will occur, and 
she’s ready to run the game. She thinks it’d be nice to 
have some background activity going on, so she plans 
to create three factions to decorate her world.
She picks out three groups that are likely to be 
significant players in this corner of her sector: the harsh 
planetary government of Typhon, the initial starting 
point for the game, the Rathskeller Combine, a mul -
tistellar megacorp based off the world of Danube in 
the neighboring solar system, and the Way of Voth, a 
pretech-worshiping cult with a hidden base on Singu-
larity, a gas giant moon in a system neighboring both.
These aren’t the only possible factions in the sys-
tem, of course, but they’re the ones most likely to be 
pertinent to PC interests. If the PCs move on, she might 
retire some of these factions to bring in new ones. She 
knows she shouldn’t have more than a half-dozen fac-
tions active at once unless she’s ready to do a lot of 
tracking during each faction turn.
She knows the Typhon government is a fairly 
powerful faction, having effective control of its home 
planet save for some plucky rebels against its autocratic 
monarchy. Force is its strongest tool, so she gives it a 
rating of 6 in that, followed by Wealth of 5 and Cun-
ning of 3. Its maximum hit points are 29. As a major 
power, it has two Force assets and two more assets of 
any kind. Typhon would love to have Pretech Infantry 
and has the Force score to support it, but its tech level 
is 4, too low for such advanced troops. It settles for a 
Strike Fleet and some Postech Infantry. Aside from that, 
it has a government Monopoly on spike drive com -
ponents and a Postech Industry that helps make them. 
It also has a Base of Influence on its home world of 
Typhon that automatically has 29 hit points, the same 
as the faction itself. Finally, it has the faction tag of 
Planetary Government, because it’s the legitimate ruler 
of Typhon.
For the Rathskeller Combine, the GM decides that 
it’s about as powerful as the Typhon government due 
to its far-flung mercantile connections. On reflection, 
she thinks its main money comes from its control of 
the ship-building industry outside the Typhon system, 
which makes it an economic competitor with the state-
run Typhon shipyards. She gives it a Wealth rating of 
6, Force of 5, and Cunning of 3, with a maximum HP 
of 29. Since it’s starship-centric, she gives it Shipping 
Combine and Blockade Runner assets for Wealth, and 
other assets of Elite Skirmishers and Saboteurs. The 
Plutocratic tag fits its mercantile origins.
For the final faction, the GM decides to make 
them a relatively weak group, one that tries to use its 
limited supplies of pretech artifacts to manipulate “less 
developed” societies. She gives it a Cunning score of 
4, a Wealth of 3, and a Force of 1. Its maximum hit 
points are 15. It gets only two assets as a minor power, 
so goes with Cyberninjas and Covert Shipping to get 
those ninjas where they need to go. The GM mulls over 
the faction tags, but none seem to be quite right. She 
decides to give it her own tag of “Pretech Stores”, let-
ting it treat Singularity as a tech level 5 world for pur-
poses of buying high-tech assets there. While there’s no 
other meaningful authority on the gas giant moon, the 
GM doesn’t think it’s proper to give them the Planetary 
Government tag because there really isn’t anything else 
on Singularity except the Vothite base. They don’t have 
the implicit military power to prevent hostile military 
assets from landing on the world, so they don’t really 
fit the mold of the Planetary Government tag.
The last step in creating the factions is to give each 
of them an initial goal. She decides that the Rathskeller 
Combine is really interested in breaking into Typhon’s 
closed market. She gives it the Expand Influence goal, 
which rewards it when it can found a Base of Influence 
on another planet. Typhon is a violent, expansionistic 
power that goes in for Blood the Enemy, so it seeks to 
inflict hit point damage on rival assets equal to the sum 
of its attributes, or 14 points. The Vothites know they 
can’t survive a direct confrontation with either import-
ant power, so they want to get ready to make a move 
when they’re stronger; they choose Peaceable Kingdom, 
needing to spend four consecutive turns without taking 
an Attack action.
With this established, the GM is ready to run the 
first faction turn.
Turn One
The GM randomly selects the Rathskeller Combine to 
go first, followed by Typhon, and then the Vothites.
First, the Combine earns its income for the turn; 
half its Wealth plus a quarter of its total Force and Cun-
ning, rounded down. That means 5 FacCreds.
Next, it pays maintenance. It has no assets that 
require maintenance and hasn’t got more assets of any 
one type than its corresponding attribute, so it has no 
maintenance cost. If it were to accumulate four Cun -
ning assets, however, while only having a Cunning of 
3, it would have to pay one FacCred for each over the 
limit. Bases of Influence don’t count for this purpose.
Now the Combine has to decide what action to 
take. It knows that Typhon is itching for a fight. The 
Combine is nervous about their rival’s Strike Fleet, 
but that seems to be the only force that immediately 
threatens them. The Postech Infantry that Typhon has 
doesn’t have any practical way to cross into Danubian 
space unless Typhon buys some sort of transport asset. 
Right now there seems no way for the Typhonians 
to do that, so the Combine decides to go for a long 
economic game, taking the Buy Asset action to spend 2 
===== PAGE 233 =====
examPle of faCtion Play •229 
FacCreds on Harvesters. The GM decides that this rep-
resents a new flotilla of asteroid mining tugs. A faction 
can buy only one asset per turn and can take only one 
action, so the Combine’s turn is over.
Typhon isn’t wasting any time. It gets its FacCred 
income for the turn of 4 FacCreds and uses its action to 
Use Asset Ability to let its Strike Fleet enter the Danube 
system. Some assets require governmental permission 
to move them into a system with an existing govern -
ment, but not Strike Fleets. They tend to make their 
own permission. Typhon would like to start attacking 
Combine assets, but it can only take one action per turn, 
so it will have to wait until the next one to open fire.
The Vothites are keeping their head down, accru-
ing their 2 FacCreds. As poor as they are, they need 
to do something about it, so they invest in a Buy As -
set action to get a Harvester. The GM decides that it 
represents scavenger teams dispatched to loot vital 
resources from the dangerous pretech caches hidden 
on Singularity.
As the final step, the GM translates these faction 
actions into newsfeed stories to share with the PCs. 
She scribbles up short news blasts about “Typhon First 
Fleet Dispatched to Suppress Piracy in the Danube Sys-
tem”, “Rathskeller Combine Commissions New Wing 
of Asteroid Miners”, and “Unusual Ship Traffic In Sin-
gularity System”. These stories may not have the whole 
truth about affairs, but they’re what the PCs would find 
out from the local news organizations.
Turn Two
The PCs completed their first adventure and are busy 
swanning around in the Danube system. Nothing 
they’ve done directly impinges on the local factions, 
so the GM simply runs the next faction turn after the 
session is over. Random rolls give Voth the first action, 
then Typhon, and then the Combine.
Voth gets another 2 FacCreds and dutifully uses 
Buy Asset to get another Harvester, scaling up their sal-
vage efforts. This makes two Wealth assets that Voth 
has; it can get one more Wealth asset before it starts to 
have to pay maintenance on any additional ones. They 
would’ve liked to have used Use An Asset to see if their 
existing Harvester made them any money, but they 
can’t take two different actions during the same turn, 
so they must wait for now.
Typhon now collects its 4 FacCreds, for a total of 
8, and uses the Attack action. If it had multiple assets in 
position, it could attack with all of them; as it stands, 
only the Strike Fleet is in the same location as a rival 
power. It aims at the Base of Influence, but the Com-
bine gets to decide which asset the Strike Fleet engages. 
It chooses to defend with its Blockade Runners. The 
Strike Fleet’s Attack is Force versus Force, so Typhon 
rolls 1d10 and adds its Force rating for a score of 11. 
Against this, the Combine rolls 1d10 and adds its own 
Force rating for a score of 12. The Strike Fleet’s attack 
has failed, and it takes the Counterattack damage of the 
Blockade Runners, for 2d4 damage, for 7 points. The 
Strike Fleet is now down to 1 hit point.
The Rathskeller Combine now senses an opportu-
nity. They collect their income of 5 FacCreds for a total 
of 8 and take an Attack action of their own, ordering 
the Saboteurs to press the attack. The Strike Fleet is the 
only viable target in the sector, so Typhon is forced to 
defend with it. The Saboteurs’ attack is Cunning versus 
Cunning. The Combine rolls an 8, a tepid result, while 
the Strike Fleet gets lucky and rolls a 9. The Saboteurs 
are forced to take the Strike Fleet’s counterattack dam-
age of 1d8, and roll a 6; they are wiped out. Stung, the 
Combine throws the Elite Skirmishers into the fray, 
the only other asset they have that even has an attack. 
They roll a Force vs. Force attack, Typhon rolls badly, 
and the Strike Fleet is destroyed.
The GM then writes up the news blasts for the 
session, describing how “pirate” boarding parties de -
stroyed the Typhonian strike fleet by taking advantage 
of security breaches caused by recently-discovered sab-
oteurs. She decides that both Danube and Typhon want 
to avoid outright war, and that Danube’s planetary gov-
ernment won’t get involved so long as Typhon is only 
cutting down Combine holdings.
Turn Three
As it turns out, the PCs took notice of that news item 
about Singularity’s ship activity and decided to inves -
tigate. In the course of their adventure they killed a 
Vothite salvage crew and snatched away a precious haul 
of pretech artifacts that the crew had been recovering. 
The GM decides that this costs the Vothites one of their 
two Harvester assets. There is no die roll or faction ac-
tion related to this; the PCs did it, so it simply happens. 
They also left plenty of evidence, so the GM makes a 
note to have a Vothite cyberninja come after them and 
their stolen artifacts. Such small-scale actions related to 
PC adventures don’t require a full faction action, so the 
Vothites don’t need to use an Attack action to go after 
the troublesome PCs.
The Vothites go first this round and are not 
amused. They collect their 2 FacCreds and Use An 
Ability to see if their remaining Harvester makes them 
any money; they roll a 4 on its ability and gain an extra 
FacCred, for a total of 3 in its coffers this turn.
Typhon goes next, collecting 4 FacCreds for a total 
of 12. It’s licking its wounds, but at least it managed to 
inflict 6 of the necessary 14 points of damage on a foe 
to succeed at its Blood the Enemy goal. It uses Buy Asset 
to buy a new Strike Fleet, reconstituting it from the 
survivors and spending all 12 FacCreds on it.
The Combine goes last, and is at a crossroads. Their 
income this turn gives them 13 FacCreds and they’ve 
successfully destroyed a Typhionian Strike Fleet, but 
it cost them their Saboteurs, and they have only one 
asset left that can even attack at all. What should they 
do to address the Typhonian menace? Maybe some PC 
mercenaries might tip the scales for them…
===== PAGE 234 =====

===== PAGE 235 =====
GAME MASTER RESOURCES
The following pages include a number of tables for the 
quick generation of NPCs, patrons, names, place names, 
and quick encounters. The tables are in no way intend-
ed to be exhaustive or particularly detailed. They are 
simply quick conveniences for the GM to spare con -
stant reference to the internet or other books to nail 
down the basic flavoring of their NPCs.
Aside from these tables, this section also discusses 
some of the more common issues that arise for GMs 
of Stars Without Number. PC death, the role of combat, 
when to use skill checks, how to handle investigations, 
and other potentially sticky elements are reviewed and 
advice given for the practical handling of these matters.
In addition, this chapter gives some guidelines on 
converting material from the first edition of the game 
to the current revised rules. A selection of potential 
house rules are also suggested for groups that wish to 
customize their game a little more.
When applying any of these guidelines or sugges -
tions, however, it is important that you remember a 
critical thing about running the game at your table.
Your Game and Your Group
The most important thing you can remember as a GM 
running Stars Without Number is that you are running 
it for a specific group of people . You are not running it 
for a generic Typical Gamer, you are running it for Bob 
and Eunice and Feng and Tyler. There is no genericized 
advice that can be applied to your specific group that is 
nearly as helpful as your own powers of social expertise 
and your personal knowledge of the table.
Game designers sometimes fall into the trap of 
trying to force social outcomes at the table through 
specific game rules. These rules can encourage certain 
outcomes in the general case, but they cannot compel 
results. They are certainly not nearly as effective in pro-
ducing an outcome as you, the GM, can be, because 
these rules can’t know your players as well as you do.
Whenever you consider making a house rule, or 
adding a tweak to the game, or even basic consider -
ations of what kind of sandbox excitement you should 
be offering to your players, you must always think 
about the specific players you have. Don’t worry about 
the Typical Gamer. The Typical Gamer is not at your 
table. If Bob really wants a new focus that allows his PC 
to do a particular trick, you do not need to think of all 
the ways a Typical Gamer could abuse or misuse that 
new power. You need to think of the ways Bob could 
misuse it. Maybe he is the kind of gamer who would be 
very disruptive to the game with the ability, and maybe 
you know how he plays well enough to tell that he’d 
never cause a problem with it. The same ability that 
would be absolutely terrible in the hands of some play-
ers can be perfectly safe in the hands of others. Only 
you can reasonably tell which is which.
The same general attitude is necessary towards 
other elements of your campaign, not just the house 
rules. You need to think about how your specific play-
ers are likely to react to plot hooks, campaign elements, 
and new additions to the game. If you know Eunice 
was bored out of her mind by an adventure session 
that revolved around trading, it’s probably a bad idea 
to offer her hooks that focus on commercial dealings, 
or at least talk it over with her outside the game before 
you introduce it to make sure there’s something about 
the hook that she can find engaging.
As the GM, you already have a lot of responsibility 
on your shoulders. You have the adventures to create, 
the sandbox to populate, and the game itself to run. It 
is very unlikely that you have the energy or the time 
to worry about creating universally-functional house 
rules and generalized systems. That is the game design-
er’s job. It’s up to me to give you general rules that will 
work well in most situations and provide serviceable 
results with the Typical Gamer. That kind of aver -
aged-out design is necessary if you’re to be provided 
with a basic toolbox of useful mechanics and systems.
But you can do better, because you know your 
audience. You know what they want, what they’re 
interested in, and how they’re likely to use the tools 
you hand them. You can create specific house rules and 
case-by-case permissions that mold your game to fit the 
needs and interests of your own table.
Stars Without Number is designed in the spirit of 
old-school gaming, where these sort of house rules and 
campaign-specific systems are totally acceptable and 
perfectly normal. This game is not a delicate flower 
that will wilt if you touch it the wrong way. It is built 
on a basic mechanical chassis more than forty years old, 
a veritable AK-47 of game design, and it can take an 
incredible amount of punishment and careless handling 
without breaking. You will not ruin your game by add-
ing in house rules that make sense to you.
This game belongs to you and your players. As 
the designer, I only get a vote in how things should be; 
the ultimate decision is always with you and your play 
group. Only you properly understand the goals of your 
group and the kind of fun you want to have, and only 
you and your players can provide the definitive under-
standing of your ultimate aim. I am providing you with 
a basic structure that will work for most groups, but it’s 
up to you to add the chrome or tweaks that you want.
Perhaps you won’t need to add any. It may well be 
that the rules exactly as written serve your purpose just 
fine, and you have no particular desire to tweak them. 
If that’s the case, then that’s fine. But you should never 
be afraid to reach in and adjust things to improve your 
own play. Add systems from other old-school-inspired 
games, brew up your own rules, or excise bits that don’t 
fit. This game is yours, and you should play it your way.
===== PAGE 236 =====
232• ComPliCationS
Common game masTer ComPlICaTIons
Once you’ve successfully created your sector and gath -
ered the players, you might find a few difficulties crop-
ping up in the course of play. There are certain pitfalls 
and complications that are particular to the style of play 
that Stars Without Number encourages, and it’s helpful 
to have an idea beforehand of how to deal with them.
Death
Characters in Stars Without Number die easily. The 
average third-level psychic might well be taken out 
by a lucky pistol round, and even high-level warriors 
don’t have more than 60 or 70 hit points. It’s true that 
biopsionics and lazarus patches can revive characters 
that get medical help in time, but there are plenty of 
situations where there’s just not time to save a team -
mate or the attempt proves a failure. If the rules are 
used as written, PCs who regularly put themselves in 
dangerous situations are going to die.
You and your players should decide at the start of 
the game how you want to deal with this. For maxi -
mum old-school authenticity, you might mutually de-
cide to just let the dice fall where they may. If Captain 
Spaulding plunges into the sulfur volcanoes of Badghati 
IV, the high-level veteran of dozens of daring inter -
stellar escapades gets a touching space memorial and 
his player rolls up a replacement. This is the default 
assumption of the game, and it can add a great deal of 
excitement and reward to the sensation of navigating 
a character through lethal challenges.
It can also really aggravate players who enjoy 
building deeply-involved PCs with many close ties to 
the game world and its characters. A GM can decide to 
omit the risk of death in most cases, reducing PCs with 
0 hit points to “gravely wounded” status and allowing 
them to be revived with medical attention. Some sit -
uations might run the risk of real death, but the GM 
can save this for occasions of genuine dramatic impor-
tance. There’s nothing at all wrong with this approach 
to death, and it can help some players focus on the story 
that they and their group are creating rather than living 
in fear of every goon with a combat rifle.
Of course, there are shades of gray between these 
two extremes, and most GMs come to inhabit some 
point on this spectrum. There are many ways the GM 
can lessen the risk of death without out-and-out de -
nying it. In particular, the GM can cause enemies to 
spread their attacks over a group rather than focusing 
on the weakest PC. Hostiles can pay more attention to 
the warriors in the group rather than the experts or 
psychics, especially when the Warrior has yet to use his 
class ability to negate a hit. You can take care not to in-
clude instant-death traps or devices in your adventures, 
or fabricate situations where a character’s life hinges on 
a single die roll. You can include substantial numbers 
of NPC henchmen and companions in an adventure, 
and let them soak up a portion of the danger. All of 
these tactics can be used to tacitly lessen the danger of 
character death without taking it off the table.
Sooner or later, however, it’s likely that some PC is 
going to kick the bucket. At that point, it becomes nec-
essary to get a replacement into the action. The replace-
ment PC should be added as quickly as possible, and it 
can often be advantageous for players to roll up these 
replacements before the game even starts, so they have 
a character in hand should their former PC catch a bad 
case of laser poisoning. Creating the characters before-
hand also allows the group to set up ties of association 
that help justify why they’re suddenly willing to include 
the new PC in their adventures. These replacements 
can be members of the crew of the ship they’re trav -
elling on, outworlders slouching around the local bars, 
wanderers gone native among the locals, or prisoners 
of whatever nefarious group the party is fighting. The 
key factor is to get the replacement into action quickly, 
so the player who’s lost his or her PC isn’t punished 
with inactivity at the table as well as PC loss.
It’s generally easiest to have the replacement PC 
be the same level as the dead PC. For high-level adven-
tures, it’s distressingly likely that a low-level PC would 
die quickly when facing challenges of that caliber. If 
they do come in at a lower level, you’re going to have 
to make some allowances when it comes time for them 
to gain experience points. If everyone is gaining points 
at the same rate, the lower-level PC will never catch 
up; you may want to give them a bonus after each ad-
venture to ensure that eventually they match the same 
level of competence as the rest of the crew.
Skill Checks
Skill checks are susceptible to overuse. Some GMs end 
up forcing a skill check on everything more compli -
cated than tying your bootlaces, or prohibit PCs from 
even hoping to accomplish a feat for which they lack 
the appropriate skill. Skill checks are not meant to be 
the sole way that a PC gets something accomplished 
in the world.
You should be charitable about the things a charac-
ter can accomplish without a skill check. If an Expert’s 
concept is that of a crack spaceship pilot with a Dex -
terity modifier of +2 and Pilot-2 skill, you shouldn’t be 
expecting him to make skill checks to operate the ship 
under normal conditions. He can take off, he can land, 
he can get to places in the system without bothering 
with skill checks. Even someone with Pilot-0 should 
likely be able to do as much, except the expert pilot 
can do it without a check even amid high winds and 
low visibility. Let the PCs be good at their chosen focus.
Don’t spam skill checks. If a character is trying 
to repair a fusion power plant while under fire from 
badlands raiders, don’t turn it into a roll-each-turn ex-
===== PAGE 237 =====
ComPliCationS •233 
travaganza to determine how far he progresses in his 
attempt. Let him roll once, with a failure meaning ei-
ther that he can’t do it in the available time or that he’ll 
need another 1d6 rounds before he can bring the de -
fense laser power plant online. Give him player choices 
each turn, like deciding whether to bring a laser online 
early and risk a short in the wiring. Let a single skill 
check indicate the general course of success or failure, 
but then let the PC make additional choices rather than 
additional rolls. Rolls can only add so much tension, 
and tension alone does not guarantee engagement with 
a situation.
Don’t require a skill check unless failing it means 
something. If a character can simply keep trying at 
something with no real negative consequences, it’s 
not worth a skill check. They’ll get it sooner or later, 
so it’s easiest to just tell them that it was successful. If 
time is important and there’s a significant difference 
between accomplishing it instantly or accomplishing it 
soon, just follow a failed skill check with a roll of 1d6 
and assume that many rounds, minutes, or hours go by 
before the PC finally gets it right.
Don’t ignore actions taken outside of skill checks. 
If a character jams a titanium wrecking bar into the 
cogs of an alien death trap, you probably shouldn’t re-
quire him to make a successful Fix roll to disable the de-
vice. What he’s done will objectively work, and there’s 
no point or need in rolling for it. If there’s a casket 
of luminous Mettauan glass underneath the senator’s 
bed, then the players will find it if they look under the 
bed, and no Notice check is needed to see if they notice 
it. Skill checks are best used to reflect the results of a 
complicated or uncertain attempt at an action. If the 
PC tries something that anyone can do and that would 
have an obvious result, then just let the result happen. 
Don’t use a skill check unless the outcome is unclear.
Combat
Combat in Stars Without Number  tends to be fairly le-
thal. One good roll by a pistol-wielding thug can take 
out almost any first level character, and characters nev-
er really scale to the point where they can afford to hold 
enemies in contempt. You should take care to structure 
your adventures and situations so that PCs are very 
rarely forced into fights. The shotguns and laser rifles 
should come out either because the PCs have chosen 
to use them or because they’re facing the consequences 
of their own missteps.
Because combat is so dangerous, it’s vital to al -
low the PCs to set it up on their own terms, assuming 
they’re cunning and prudent enough to take advantage 
of their opportunities. Ambushes, AC bonuses for cov-
er, and the use of the environment to hurt and baffle 
their foes should all be encouraged. If a character wants 
to use an element of the environment to do something 
interesting, let them. “You do that, and nothing hap -
pens.” is rarely a good answer for any halfway plausible 
PC action.
Enemies should also be played as their morale in-
dicates. A pack of street thugs will not transform into 
Spartans at Thermopylae, dying to the last man to 
prevent the PCs from discovering their gang hideout. 
Even trained and disciplined combatants are going to 
have serious thoughts about retreat as soon as their 
comrades start dying. Only when enemies feel trapped 
or are defending something as precious to them as their 
lives will they normally fight to the last.
Negotiation and Diplomacy
There is a Talk skill, and the fact that this and similar 
social skills exist sometimes causes players or GMs to 
simply shut off more informal evaluations of social 
situations. When the PC wants to convince an NPC 
of something, they roll Cha/Talk and let the dice tell 
them how far the NPC is willing to buy their premise. 
The actual words and arguments they use are simply 
decorations to the event.
On one level, this is justifiable. The player of the 
Warrior isn’t expected to be a real-life shootist to roll 
a good attack roll, so why should the player of the sil -
ver-tongued Expert con man have to come up with 
a smooth line of patter to use his own abilities? It’s 
legitimate and reasonable to let the dice determine the 
success of a conversational gambit. If a player has spent 
character resources on something like social skills, they 
should see a mechanical benefit from it. Moreover, re-
lying on a player’s conversational talents to move ne-
gotiations can often boil down to a game of finding the 
right conversational gambit for the GM rather than 
rationally persuading the NPC.
Still, some players and GMs prefer to let actual 
argumentation play a bigger role. One potential way to 
do this is to let the player state his or her case, and then 
set the Talk check difficulty accordingly. Convincing a 
crime boss to give a PC access to his network of corrupt 
city officials might be a difficulty 8 test if the player 
makes a good argument for it, while a desultory request 
might be difficulty 10. Alternately, you might implicitly 
adjust the consequences of success or failure based on 
the character’s total Charisma and skill bonus. A char -
acter with a +5 total might not succeed in persuading 
the crime boss if they roll very low, but he’ll point them 
towards someone who might be able to help them. The 
key for this sort of approach is to let both skills and 
player argumentation have a visible effect on the out-
come, so that players feel that both matter.
In either case, you should make clear to the group 
which model will be used when they’re making up their 
characters. It prevents difficulty later when the player 
running the character with a -1 Charisma modifier and 
no social skills expects his own glib tongue to carry the 
day with NPCs.
===== PAGE 238 =====
234• ComPliCationS
Searching and Investigation
Many adventures rely on the party solving a mystery 
or unearthing the dark truths behind some enigmat -
ic event. PCs can occasionally get frustrated by these 
adventures when they feel that they’ve hit a dead end 
or are presented with a set of clues that they, the play -
ers, can’t hope to puzzle out. Conversely, players can 
sometimes grow bored when the adventures become 
a sequence of skill tests, with the PCs simply trying to 
roll high so that the GM will let them advance.
Running a good investigation-based adventure 
can be difficult, but there are a few tactics that can be 
useful to a GM. First, identify those pieces of informa-
tion that must be found in order to solve the puzzle. 
Cracking the secret organlegging ring run out of the 
city’s child protective services department might hinge 
on identifying the secret lab in which the organs are 
harvested, the corrupt CPS chief who hides the goods 
in her home, and the crooked physician who launders 
the organs into the donor system. These three facts 
have to be discovered in order for the PCs to progress.
Once you’ve established the facts, watch for op -
portunities to let them be discovered. Drawn in by the 
hook of a recurring urchin NPC they knew who van -
ished after being picked up by protective services, the 
PCs might check out the NPC’s old haunts or associates, 
only to learn that a number of street kids have gone 
missing after CPS collected them, and that all of them 
were picked up by a particular agent. Don’t make the 
discovery of vital information hinge on a die roll. If 
the PCs take rational investigative steps, they should 
be given something to show for it, even if it’s just the 
confidence that their current route is a dead end. You 
should be trying to give out this information when the 
PCs give you an excuse to do so, rather than hoarding 
it against all but precisely correct lines of investigation.
You also shouldn’t feel bad about giving PCs a 
break if they start to flail, either by introducing a help-
ful NPC to put them back on the trail or remind them 
of some earlier point they didn’t fully investigate. By 
the same token, you shouldn’t hesitate to let them deal 
with the consequences of tardiness. If they spend too 
long in distractions before finding their urchin friend, 
they might discover nothing more than spare parts.
One particular point that often comes up is the 
question of searching an area. Some GMs just let the 
PCs all make Notice checks to see if they notice some-
thing hidden. This has the advantage of being quick 
and simple, but it also can put vital information at the 
mercy of good dice. Other GMs require the players to 
specifically say what parts of an area they’re searching, 
what they’re looking under or inside, and otherwise 
describe the specifics of their search. This can penalize 
players who don’t correctly envision the area the GM 
is describing. One compromise is to simply give players 
vital clues when they say that they are searching, and 
then use one or both of the other methods to let them 
search for supplementary facts and helpful details.
Salvage
The far future is full of expensive decor. Truly enter-
prising PCs sometimes are of a mind to “salvage” a place 
down to its foundations, ripping out everything that 
can be resold and trucking it all off to be converted into 
credits. To some extent, this is simply common sense; 
no red-blooded freebooter would simply leave un -
claimed valuables lying around when he knows they’ll 
fetch a good price at the starport. Still, it can be tedious 
to handle the logistics of salvage and unbalancing to the 
game to allow PCs to cash in on every alien fork and 
wall panel they can drag back to civilization.
The easiest way to deal with this is to simply make 
clear that most non-portable valuables the PCs might 
salvage are just too difficult to move on the secondary 
market. Questions of legal ownership, finding a suit -
ably indiscriminate buyer, and avoiding tax scrutiny all 
combine to make such efforts more trouble than they’re 
worth. It can be interesting to make an adventure out of 
moving some particularly exceptional piece of salvage, 
but as a general rule, it’s just not worth it to strip the 
copper wiring out of a crime boss’ hideout.
There is also the issue of PCs methodically strip -
ping the armor, weapons, and pocket change from their 
dead foes. In most cases this is self-limiting, as most 
PCs can’t easily pack around a half-dozen combat rifles 
while engaged in the kind of pursuits that leave them 
fighting their former owners. In the unlikely case that 
the PCs come back with a cargo sled, most of the ar -
mor is probably worthless due to the perforations that 
killed its wearer and the weaponry is unlikely to be so 
valuable as to unbalance the game. Even in that case, 
moving the weapons on the black market is usually not 
a trivial enterprise. You shouldn’t discourage PCs from 
upgrading their own equipment from the plunder of 
the fallen or taking exceptionally valuable pieces for lat-
er fencing, but you shouldn’t feel obligated to let them 
decamp with the battlefield on their backs.
The actual mechanics of selling plunder can be as 
complicated as you wish to make them. It may be that 
what the PCs retrieve can be sold openly on the world, 
usually for around half its purchase value if a quick sale 
is desired. Something closer to full price can only be ob-
tained with the sort of patience, contacts, and attention 
that adventurers rarely have avaialble.
A fence might be needed for those goods which 
were acquired in illicit fashion, or items that are out -
lawed for common trade. Fences rarely pay more than 
ten or twenty percent of an item’s purchase price. Many 
such difficulties can be removed by taking the loot off-
world and laundering it somewhere beyond the reach 
of the planet’s laws.
===== PAGE 239 =====
ComPliCationS •235 
InTersTellar Trade
As an extension of this, some groups will want to make 
a killing in interstellar trade, carrying the goods of one 
world to another to make a fast credit. This is a ven -
erable science-fiction trope, and there’s no reason you 
shouldn’t allow it, but there are a few considerations 
to keep in mind when dealing with space commerce.
Perhaps most importantly, there is no such thing 
as interstellar bulk shipping in Stars Without Number . 
Even the largest spike drive ships have cargo capacities 
measured in a few tens of thousands of tons, while a 
modern oil tanker has a capacity of around 500,000 
tons. Trying to run a meaningful trade in bulk com -
modities has been a lost cause ever since the jump gates 
failed and massive system-ship freighters could no lon-
ger make the jump between worlds. Such commerce 
can exist inside a system, with huge slowboats moving 
from planet to planet, but modern trade relies on car-
rying small loads of high-value goods or expert services.
Most small merchant ships such as the ones a PC 
group is likely to own rely on in-system supply runs as 
their bread and butter. They cart loads of food, water, 
replacement personnel, spare parts, and other life sup-
port supplies out to remote asteroid mines, research 
stations, and extraction plants. The pay is rarely much, 
but such supply run missions are excellent hooks for 
dropping a group into the middle of some disaster.
Trade beyond supply runs usually revolves around 
moving local specialty tech or products. Local art, exot-
ic pharmaceuticals, high-quality technical specialties, or 
passengers with special skills who want to reach a par-
ticular world all make up this class of trade. For most 
purposes, it’s not necessary to really elaborate on the 
specifics of this, though it can add flavor to make up a 
product or two unique to a given world.
There are also exceptionally risky trading expe -
ditions to lostworlders, bringing the fruits of modern 
postech to their benighted nations. While the weapon-
ry, pharmaceuticals, and technical artifacts are usually 
greedily desired on these worlds, the natives often have 
very little of value to pay for them. Explorer-merchants 
often have to investigate a lostworlder culture carefully 
before they can identify any particular product or re -
source that can be usefully shipped interstellar distanc-
es to justify the trip. Some particularly unscrupulous 
merchants do not balk at taking payment in local slaves 
for export to decadent or dangerous worlds.
There are also “missionary” supply runs to these 
primitive worlds. The Preceptors of the Great Archive 
occasionally run missions on a planet to disseminate 
valuable technical and artistic knowledge among the 
locals, and there are always a selection of determined 
missionaries bent on bringing the word of their faith to 
the heathens. While these missions normally can sup -
ply their own food, offworld medicine and spares are 
vital for keeping their more advanced tech operating.
More sinister than the Preceptors and the pious 
are the “Kurtzes”. The prospect of ruling like a god on 
some forgotten world lures a certain type of men and 
women, a type that might normally be forced to limit 
their dark ambitions on a more technically advanced 
world, where energy weapons and powered armor 
do not give a person so vast an advantage over their 
peers. These Kurtzes seek out lost worlds with other 
like-minded men and women, usually framing their 
ambitions as a matter of “bringing advancement to the 
primitives”. Most Kurtz expeditions collapse in blood 
and horror within a few years, but some manage to 
hold on for far longer. 
Quick Trade Rules
For those who prefer not to use the full-fledged rules 
for interstellar trade provided in the Suns of Gold sup-
plement, here are a few quick guidelines for responding 
to player interest in interstellar trade. They assume the 
PCs have a ship, but are just scrounging for marginal 
shipments and fast opportunities rather than taking 
advantage of a formal trade network and steady, reli -
able work contracts.
First, let the PCs find a deal for some good that the 
planet might reasonably produce. Cheap bulk goods 
would run for 2d6 x 10 credits per ton, ordinary fin -
ished goods go for 2d6 x 100 credits per ton, and high-
tech, expensive products are 2d6 x 1,000 credits per ton. 
They can find a new deal with a week’s wait.
PCs can try to improve the purchase price with 
a Cha/Trade skill check opposed by the seller’s Wis/
Trade skill roll. On a success, the price decreases by 10% 
times the level of Trade skill the bargainer has. On a 
failure, the price remains firm.
Before the goods are loaded, roll 1d6. If the PCs 
tried to get a better price, subtract 1 from the roll. If 
the result is 1 or less, something has gone wrong and 
the goods are lost, stolen, confiscated, or fake. The PCs 
are going to have to either eat the loss or take whatever 
adventurous steps are necessary to get their money or 
goods back. These steps may involve gunfire.
When the PCs try to sell the goods, assuming the 
planet might reasonably want them, roll 2d6+1 and 
multiply it by 10 for bulk goods, 100 for finished man-
ufactures, or 1,000 for expensive goods. This is the base 
price the buyer offers to the PCs. They can bargain for 
better with the same opposed check as before, gaining 
a 10% price increase per Trade skill level on a success. 
On a failure, the PCs have to accept the offered price.
After the sale is finalized, the 1d6 needs to be rolled 
again, also with a -1 penalty if a better price was sought. 
On a result of 1 or less, the sale end of things goes awry, 
and the PCs are out both money and goods. To salvage 
them, they’ll need to conduct some sort of adventure 
revolving around reclaiming their rightful due.
===== PAGE 240 =====
236• Converting firSt edition
ConVerTIng fIrsT edITIon sTars WIThouT number
Most of this edition’s content can be used interchange-
ably with first edition Stars Without Number. Charac-
ters may be created somewhat differently, starships 
might handle combat in a new way, and psionics might 
have changed, but the end result largely uses the same 
statistics and same score ranges. An original-edition 
Stars Without Number character can adventure in a re-
vised-edition campaign without requiring much in the 
way of special rules.
Some GMs will want guidelines on converting an 
existing original-edition game to the current edition. 
This is a simple process, as the scales are the same.
Converting Characters
Characters have the same attributes, character level, 
and all other scores unless specified otherwise. Skills 
are converted directly into the closest equivalent; Com-
bat/Projectile becomes Shoot, and so forth. In the case 
of multiple skills now compressed into a single skill, 
like a PC with both Combat/Projectile and Combat/
Energy, the highest skill is converted and the lower 
skills can be exchanged for any other skills of the same 
level of the player’s choice.
PCs retain their class. Hit points are re-rolled for 
the character based on their revised-edition hit die. 
Thus, a 5th level Psychic can reroll 5d6 for their hit 
points. PCs may keep their existing hit point totals if 
the new roll is lower.
PCs may pick a number of foci appropriate to 
their class and level. If converting a 2nd level War -
rior, for example, the PC could pick their initial focus, 
their bonus Warrior focus, and the focus they get at 
second level. If they pick foci that grant bonus skills, 
apply the bonus as 3 additional skill points to the skill 
as described on page 57.
PC experience points are pro-rated based on the 
campaign. If the character was halfway to 7th level in 
the existing campaign, place their experience points 
halfway to 7th level under the revised rules.
Attack bonuses and Armor Class are calculated us-
ing the new rules, as are saving throw scores.
Converting Psionics
The rules above are sufficient for converting most PCs, 
but the powers of Psychic PCs are a bit trickier.
To get the PC’s psychic skill ratings, take their pri-
mary discipline, halve it, and round it up. Take their 
other disciplines, halve them, and round down. Thus, 
a PC with a primary Telepathy discpline of 9 and sec -
ondary disciplines of Metapsionics 7 and Biopsionics 
2 would be converted to Telepathy-5, Metapsionics-3 
and Biopsionics-1. For disciplines above level-0, they 
can pick a free technique from each skill level they 
know, plus one additional technique for each discipline 
from any level they know. Calculate Effort normally.
Converting Creatures
Flip Armor Classes to ascending values by subtracting 
the creature’s AC from 20. No other changes are need-
ed; existing attack bonuses, hit dice, saving throws, and 
so forth can be used as written.
Converting Ships
Give NPC ships an appropriate number of Command 
Points to use each round in ship combat. Civilian ships 
and fighters should have 4 CP, military ships and ex -
perienced pirates should have 5 CP, and higher scores 
should be reserved for elite or spacer-native crews.
Adjust the ship’s maintenance cost based on the 
new six-month maintenance schedule.
Ship statistics such as hit points, speed, Power, 
Mass, and other attributes are generally the same in 
both editions. If the PCs build a new ship you can check 
it against the numbers, but existing ships can be left 
unchanged during use.
Converting Equipment
Most equipment and weaponry can be used unchanged, 
as they’re the same in both editions. You may need to 
use the revised edition version of a particular suit of 
armor or treat a monoblade as a medium advanced 
weapon rather than a unique type of armament, but 
no real conversion is needed.
For melee weapons, give it the appropriate Shock 
rating for its size. Small weapons have Shock scores of 
1/AC 15, medium weapons have scores of 2/13 AC, and 
large weapons have scores of 2/15 AC.
For gear that forces a saving throw on a target, 
simply have the victim make whichever saving throw 
seems most appropriate to the item’s effect. In case of 
Luck saves, substitute Mental saves or a pure blind 
chance of 50% success.
Using Existing Sourcebooks
Existing Stars Without Number sourcebooks such as 
Suns of Gold, Skyward Steel, Starvation Cheap, and 
Darkness Visible can be used with few or no changes. 
Most of the resources in these books were designed to 
be used in a system-agnostic fashion, and the agency 
construction rules in Darkness Visible or the interstellar 
trade rules in Suns of Gold can be employed without 
altering anything.
In a few cases, these sourcebooks may call for 
checks from skills that have been changed in the revised 
edition. Simply use the new version’s skill in such cases; 
if Suns of Gold tells you to add a PC’s Business score to 
some total, just add their Trade score instead.
===== PAGE 241 =====
houSe ruleS •237 
house rules and The game
Stars Without Number derives from an old-school gam-
ing tradition where house rules were almost universal. 
The basic chassis of the game is simple enough and 
rugged enough to handle all kinds of tweaks and ad -
justments without collapsing, and it is your sacred and 
inalienable right to bend the game in any direction you 
wish if it improves your fun.
You are encouraged to try the rules as-written at 
first, though, so you can be sure that you really do want 
to change something. If you do decide to shuffle things 
around, here are some possible house rules you could 
adopt, and some suggestions about their effects.
No Shock Damage: Weapons do not do Shock damage. 
This can simplify melee combat at the cost of dis-
couraging PCs from choosing to use melee weap-
ons and increasing the “whiff” factor with them. 
If you drop Shock damage, you might also choose 
to drop the Snap Attack combat maneuver, as it’s 
no longer necessary to give gunslingers a way to 
blaze down charging melee attackers before they 
get into range.
Use Original Skill Lists: Like the skill list from the orig-
inal edition of SWN better? Use it instead. When 
creating characters, allow skill picks or rolls to 
be converted to a corresponding original-edition 
skill. If the PC rolls “Shoot”, for example, let them 
pick Combat/Gunnery, Combat/Projectile, or 
Combat/Energy instead. When the existing rules 
call for a particular new skill, let the PC use any old 
skill that plausibly matches its function.
Don’t Use Command Points: Don’t want to track Com -
mand Points in ship combat? Eliminate all actions 
that grant Command Points and just let each PC 
pick one action from their department list each 
turn. The captain’s Support Department action 
now gives that department a bonus action, and 
the gunner now has a Fire At A System action that 
lets them fire one weapon at a targeted system at 
a -4 penalty to hit. NPC ships can either fire all 
weapons in a round or fire only one weapon and 
take one action relevant to their immediate needs.
No Ranged Weapon Binding: One of the significant 
combat differences between the revised edition 
of the game and the original is the rule limiting 
the use of ranged weapons when a hostile melee 
combatant is adjacent. Some GMs will want to 
drop this rule for simplicity’s sake, and that can 
work, but it may leave melee specialists feeling a 
little superfluous.
Use a Grid in Combat: While the game isn’t written 
around the use of miniatures and a combat grid, 
GMs who want to go to the extra effort of mak -
ing up such resources can do so. Using two-meter 
squares or hexes is likely to give the best results.
Eliminate Psionics: Some GMs who want a more “hard 
sci-fi” game might choose to ditch psionics from 
the setting. In their absence, the Scream can sim -
ply have been an alien energy pulse that shattered 
the Jump Gates and left the worlds of humankind 
isolated for centuries. If you eliminate psychic PCs, 
however, you’ll want to take care that the group 
has access to other healing resources, such as stims 
and trained PC medics.
Drop FTL Starflight: GMs who want to run a strict -
ly one-solar-system game might eliminate FTL 
spaceflight as an option. The Engines of Babylon 
supplement for the original game discusses how to 
change the starship rules for a TL3 campaign that 
has edged into intra-system space flight.
Boost Starting Levels: The default campaign assumes 
that PCs will start at first level, as experienced 
but extremely mortal heroes. Groups that want 
to make room for a little more durability without 
using the heroic PC rules in the game’s deluxe ver-
sion might choose to start at third level instead of 
first, or give a flat 10 HP bonus to all PCs.
Add Universal Psionics: A GM might choose to run a 
campaign where every PC has some degree of 
psionic power. In such games, every PC should 
get the bonus of being a Partial Psychic as given 
under the Adventurer class. Adventurers who 
choose the Partial Psychic option should be treat-
ed as full Psychics, and the full Psychic class itself is 
dropped. If using the space magic rules in the de-
luxe game version, the same method can be used 
to add universal magic abilities to PCs, either as 
partial Magisters, Adepts, or Arcanists.
Use Plot Points:  Some groups prefer to have a certain 
amount of narrative control given to the PCs, ei-
ther to save them from otherwise-certain doom or 
allow them to make certain statements about the 
situation that are automatically true. Under such 
circumstances, you might give each PC two “plot 
points” that can be spent to save them when they 
would otherwise certainly perish, or else make an 
adjustment to the current adventuring situation 
that the GM judges amenable. Each time the PC 
advances a level, these plot points reset. Any un-
spent ones are lost.
Make Combat a Bloodbath: A few groups like to empha-
size the abject horror and murderous danger of 
combat in their campaigns. For these groups, you 
can add the simple rule that every attack roll made 
on an even-numbered round of combat will au -
tomatically hit unless there’s a penalty on the roll, 
whether due to cover or circumstances. In that 
case, the attack is rolled normally. PCs who get 
involved in combat thus know they have a very 
limited amount of time to resolve the situation.
===== PAGE 242 =====
238• name generatorS
name generaTors
What’s in a name? For most campaigns, a very great 
deal. Names and naming conventions are an important 
and useful tool for giving your worlds a sense of co -
herence and verisimilitude. It’s all too easy to fall into 
the easy convention of nonsense-syllable names when 
a GM can get much more world-building mileage out 
of a more thoughtful use of language.
The names of people and places on a world should 
be in conformity with the local language. Every world 
is going to have its oddball names, but if the great ma-
jority of them share the same basic roots, it helps give 
the world a sense of cohesion and place. Even when the 
players have no knowledge whatsoever of the language 
or culture being used as a touchstone, using the same 
linguistic roots ensures that the same basic palette of 
sounds and word fragments will be used.
Note that language and culture are separable. Just 
because you’ve got a world flavored with Arabian-style 
architecture and kinship groupings, there’s no reason 
you can’t use French or Spanish for the language. A 
thousand-odd years in the far future, cultural trans -
mutations unimaginable to us at present have taken 
place throughout human space. There no doubt ex -
ist centuries-old interstellar cultures that bear only a 
vague resemblance to their original forms. Take ad -
vantage of this to make your own life easier.
Making Names Memorable
One difficulty that occasionally comes up at the table is 
a difficulty in remembering names that don’t have any 
grounding in languages spoken by the players. With -
out any mnemonic hook or familiarity, one string of 
polysyllables tends to blur into another.
One way to get around this problem is to attach 
strong visual or character cues to individual NPCs. 
Players might not remember a particular spaceport 
hand’s name, but they’ll remember the guy who’s con-
stantly smoking a reeking cheroot, or the woman with 
fiber-optic laced hair. As the GM, you can help prevent 
forgetfulness by using the NPC’s name regularly as well.
Creating Alien Names
One quick trick for creating wholly alien names is to 
hunt up a very obscure language online and just use 
its words to name exotic entities and places. The play -
ers are unlikely to recognize Galatian or Gothic, so 
you spare yourself from carrying the implicit cultural 
baggage of the tongue, but the language still retains a 
characteristic set of sounds that will help maintain a 
coherent aural landscape. Further “palette swaps” of 
vowels, particular consonant clusters or the like can 
make an “alien language” out of almost any speech.
===== PAGE 243 =====
name generatorS •239 
d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place
A
r
a
b
i
c
1-4 Aamir Aisha Abdel 1-2 Adan 51-52 Magrit
5-8 Ayub Alimah Awad 3-4 Ahsa 53-54 Masqat
9-12 Binyamin Badia Dahhak 5-6 Andalus 55-56 Misr
13-16 Efraim Bisharah Essa 7-8 Asmara 57-58 Muruni
17-20 Ibrahim Chanda Hanna 9-10 Asqlan 59-60 Qabis
21-24 Ilyas Daliya Harbi 11-12 Baqubah 61-62 Qina
25-28 Ismail Fatimah Hassan 13-14 Basit 63-64 Rabat
29-32 Jibril Ghania Isa 15-16 Baysan 65-66 Ramlah
33-36 Jumanah Halah Kasim 17-18 Baytlahm 67-68 Riyadh
37-40 Kazi Kaylah Katib 19-20 Bursaid 69-70 Sabtah
41-44 Lut Khayrah Khalil 21-22 Dahilah 71-72 Salalah
45-48 Matta Layla Malik 23-24 Darasalam 73-74 Sana
49-52 Mohammed Mina Mansoor 25-26 Dawhah 75-76 Sinqit
53-56 Mubarak Munisa Mazin 27-28 Ganin 77-78 Suqutrah
57-60 Mustafa Mysha Musa 29-30 Gebal 79-80 Sur
61-64 Nazir Naimah Najeeb 31-32 Gibuti 81-82 Tabuk
65-68 Rahim Nissa Namari 33-34 Giddah 83-84 Tangah
69-72 Reza Nura Naser 35-36 Harmah 85-86 Tarifah
73-76 Sharif Parveen Rahman 37-38 Hartum 87-88 Tarrakunah
77-80 Taimur Rana Rasheed 39-40 Hibah 89-90 Tisit
81-84 Usman Shalha Saleh 41-42 Hims 91-92 Uman
85-88 Yakub Suhira Salim 43-44 Hubar 93-94 Urdunn
89-92 Yusuf Tahirah Shadi 45-46 Karbala 95-96 Wasqah
93-96 Zakariya Yasmin Sulaiman 47-48 Kut 97-98 Yaburah
97-100 Zubair Zulehka Tabari 49-50 Lacant 99-100 Yaman
C
h
i
n
e
s
e
1-4 Aiguo Biyu Bai 1-2 Andong 51-52 Luzhou
5-8 Bohai Changying Cao 3-4 Anqing 53-54 Ningxia
9-12 Chao Daiyu Chen 5-6 Anshan 55-56 Pingxiang
13-16 Dai Huidai Cui 7-8 Chaoyang 57-58 Pizhou
17-20 Dawei Huiliang Ding 9-10 Chaozhou 59-60 Qidong
21-24 Duyi Jia Du 11-12 Chifeng 61-62 Qingdao
25-28 Fa Jingfei Fang 13-14 Dalian 63-64 Qinghai
29-32 Fu Lan Fu 15-16 Dunhuang 65-66 Rehe
33-36 Gui Liling Guo 17-18 Fengjia 67-68 Shanxi
37-40 Hong Liu Han 19-20 Fengtian 69-70 Taiyuan
41-44 Jianyu Meili Hao 21-22 Fuliang 71-72 Tengzhou
45-48 Kang Niu Huang 23-24 Fushun 73-74 Urumqi
49-52 Li Peizhi Lei 25-26 Gansu 75-76 Weifang
53-56 Niu Qiao Li 27-28 Ganzhou 77-78 Wugang
57-60 Peng Qing Liang 29-30 Guizhou 79-80 Wuxi
61-64 Quan Ruolan Liu 31-32 Hotan 81-82 Xiamen
65-68 Ru Shu Long 33-34 Hunan 83-84 Xian
69-72 Shen Suyin Song 35-36 Jinan 85-86 Xikang
73-76 Shi Ting Tan 37-38 Jingdezhen 87-88 Xining
77-80 Song Xia Tang 39-40 Jinxi 89-90 Xinjiang
81-84 Tao Xiaowen Wang 41-42 Jinzhou 91-92 Yidu
85-88 Xue Xiulan Wu 43-44 Kunming 93-94 Yingkou
89-92 Yi Ya Xing 45-46 Liaoning 95-96 Yuxi
93-96 Yuan Ying Yang 47-48 Linyi 97-98 Zigong
97-100 Zian Zhilan Zhang 49-50 Lushun 99-100 Zoige
===== PAGE 244 =====
240• name generatorS
d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place
E
n
g
l
i
s
h
1-4 Adam Abigail Barker 1-2 Aldington 51-52 Kedington
5-8 Albert Anne Brown 3-4 Appleton 53-54 Latchford
9-12 Alfred Beatrice Butler 5-6 Ashdon 55-56 Leigh
13-16 Allan Blanche Carter 7-8 Berwick 57-58 Leighton
17-20 Archibald Catherine Chapman 9-10 Bramford 59-60 Maresfield
21-24 Arthur Charlotte Collins 11-12 Brimstage 61-62 Markshall
25-28 Basil Claire Cook 13-14 Carden 63-64 Netherpool
29-32 Charles Eleanor Davies 15-16 Churchill 65-66 Newton
33-36 Colin Elizabeth Gray 17-18 Clifton 67-68 Oxton
37-40 Donald Emily Green 19-20 Colby 69-70 Preston
41-44 Douglas Emma Harris 21-22 Copford 71-72 Ridley
45-48 Edgar Georgia Jackson 23-24 Cromer 73-74 Rochford
49-52 Edmund Harriet Jones 25-26 Davenham 75-76 Seaford
53-56 Edward Joan Lloyd 27-28 Dersingham 77-78 Selsey
57-60 George Judy Miller 29-30 Doverdale 79-80 Stanton
61-64 Harold Julia Roberts 31-32 Elsted 81-82 Stockham
65-68 Henry Lucy Smith 33-34 Ferring 83-84 Stoke
69-72 Ian Lydia Taylor 35-36 Gissing 85-86 Sutton
73-76 James Margaret Thomas 37-38 Heydon 87-88 Thakeham
77-80 John Mary Turner 39-40 Holt 89-90 Thetford
81-84 Lewis Molly Watson 41-42 Hunston 91-92 Thorndon
85-88 Oliver Nora White 43-44 Hutton 93-94 Ulting
89-92 Philip Rosie Williams 45-46 Inkberrow 95-96 Upton
93-96 Richard Sarah Wood 47-48 Inworth 97-98 Westhorpe
97-100 William Victoria Young 49-50 Isfield 99-100 Worcester
G
r
e
e
k
1-4 Alexander Alexandra Andreas 1-2 Adramyttion 51-52 Kallisto
5-8 Alexius Amalia Argyros 3-4 Ainos 53-54 Katerini
9-12 Anastasius Callisto Dimitriou 5-6 Alikarnassos 55-56 Kithairon
13-16 Christodoulos Charis Floros 7-8 Avydos 57-58 Kydonia
17-20 Christos Chloe Gavras 9-10 Dakia 59-60 Lakonia
21-24 Damian Dorothea Ioannidis 11-12 Dardanos 61-62 Leros
25-28 Dimitris Elena Katsaros 13-14 Dekapoli 63-64 Lesvos
29-32 Dysmas Eudoxia Kyrkos 15-16 Dodoni 65-66 Limnos
33-36 Elias Giada Leventis 17-18 Efesos 67-68 Lykia
37-40 Giorgos Helena Makris 19-20 Efstratios 69-70 Megara
41-44 Ioannis Ioanna Metaxas 21-22 Elefsina 71-72 Messene
45-48 Konstantinos Lydia Nikolaidis 23-24 Ellada 73-74 Milos
49-52 Lambros Melania Pallis 25-26 Epidavros 75-76 Nikaia
53-56 Leonidas Melissa Pappas 27-28 Erymanthos 77-78 Orontis
57-60 Marcos Nika Petrou 29-30 Evripos 79-80 Parnasos
61-64 Miltiades Nikolina Raptis 31-32 Gavdos 81-82 Petro
65-68 Nestor Olympias Simonides 33-34 Gytheio 83-84 Samos
69-72 Nikos Philippa Spiros 35-36 Ikaria 85-86 Syros
73-76 Orestes Phoebe Stavros 37-38 Ilios 87-88 Thapsos
77-80 Petros Sophia Stephanidis 39-40 Illyria 89-90 Thessalia
81-84 Simon Theodora Stratigos 41-42 Iraia 91-92 Thira
85-88 Stavros Valentina Terzis 43-44 Irakleio 93-94 Thiva
89-92 Theodore Valeria Theodorou 45-46 Isminos 95-96 Varvara
93-96 Vassilios Yianna Vasiliadis 47-48 Ithaki 97-98 Voiotia
97-100 Yannis Zoe Yannakakis 49-50 Kadmeia 99-100 Vyvlos
===== PAGE 245 =====
name generatorS •241 
d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place
I
n
d
i
a
n
1-4 Amrit Amala Achari 1-2 Ahmedabad 51-52 Jaisalmer
5-8 Ashok Asha Banerjee 3-4 Alipurduar 53-54 Jharonda
9-12 Chand Chandra Bhatnagar 5-6 Alubari 55-56 Kadambur
13-16 Dinesh Devika Bose 7-8 Anjanadri 57-58 Kalasipalyam
17-20 Gobind Esha Chauhan 9-10 Ankleshwar 59-60 Karnataka
21-24 Harinder Gita Chopra 11-12 Balarika 61-62 Kutchuhery
25-28 Jagdish Indira Das 13-14 Bhanuja 63-64 Lalgola
29-32 Johar Indrani Dutta 15-16 Bhilwada 65-66 Mainaguri
33-36 Kurien Jaya Gupta 17-18 Brahmaghosa 67-68 Nainital
37-40 Lakshman Jayanti Johar 19-20 Bulandshahar 69-70 Nandidurg
41-44 Madhav Kiri Kapoor 21-22 Candrama 71-72 Narayanadri
45-48 Mahinder Lalita Mahajan 23-24 Chalisgaon 73-74 Panipat
49-52 Mohal Malati Malhotra 25-26 Chandragiri 75-76 Panjagutta
53-56 Narinder Mira Mehra 27-28 Charbagh 77-78 Pathankot
57-60 Nikhil Mohana Nehru 29-30 Chayanka 79-80 Pathardih
61-64 Omrao Neela Patil 31-32 Chittorgarh 81-82 Porbandar
65-68 Prasad Nita Rao 33-34 Dayabasti 83-84 Rajasthan
69-72 Pratap Rajani Saxena 35-36 Dikpala 85-86 Renigunta
73-76 Ranjit Sarala Shah 37-38 Ekanga 87-88 Sewagram
77-80 Sanjay Sarika Sharma 39-40 Gandhidham 89-90 Shakurbasti
81-84 Shankar Sheela Singh 41-42 Gollaprolu 91-92 Siliguri
85-88 Thakur Sunita Trivedi 43-44 Grahisa 93-94 Sonepat
89-92 Vijay Trishna Venkatesan 45-46 Guwahati 95-96 Teliwara
93-96 Vipul Usha Verma 47-48 Haridasva 97-98 Tinpahar
97-100 Yash Vasanta Yadav 49-50 Indraprastha 99-100 Villivakkam
J
a
p
a
n
e
s
e
1-4 Akira Aemi Abe 1-2 Bando 51-52 Mitsukaido
5-8 Daisuke Airi Arakaki 3-4 Chikuma 53-54 Moriya
9-12 Fukashi Ako Endo 5-6 Chikusei 55-56 Nagano
13-16 Goro Ayu Fujiwara 7-8 Chino 57-58 Naka
17-20 Hiro Chikaze Goto 9-10 Hitachi 59-60 Nakano
21-24 Hiroya Eriko Ito 11-12 Hitachinaka 61-62 Ogi
25-28 Hotaka Hina Kikuchi 13-14 Hitachiomiya 63-64 Okaya
29-32 Katsu Kaori Kinjo 15-16 Hitachiota 65-66 Omachi
33-36 Katsuto Keiko Kobayashi 17-18 Iida 67-68 Ryugasaki
37-40 Keishuu Kyouka Koga 19-20 Iiyama 69-70 Saku
41-44 Kyuuto Mayumi Komatsu 21-22 Ina 71-72 Settsu
45-48 Mikiya Miho Maeda 23-24 Inashiki 73-74 Shimotsuma
49-52 Mitsunobu Namiko Nakamura 25-26 Ishioka 75-76 Shiojiri
53-56 Mitsuru Natsu Narita 27-28 Itako 77-78 Suwa
57-60 Naruhiko Nobuko Ochi 29-30 Kamisu 79-80 Suzaka
61-64 Nobu Rei Oshiro 31-32 Kasama 81-82 Takahagi
65-68 Shigeo Ririsa Saito 33-34 Kashima 83-84 Takeo
69-72 Shigeto Sakimi Sakamoto 35-36 Kasumigaura 85-86 Tomi
73-76 Shou Shihoko Sato 37-38 Kitaibaraki 87-88 Toride
77-80 Shuji Shika Suzuki 39-40 Kiyose 89-90 Tsuchiura
81-84 Takaharu Tsukiko Takahashi 41-42 Koga 91-92 Tsukuba
85-88 Teruaki Tsuzune Tanaka 43-44 Komagane 93-94 Ueda
89-92 Tetsushi Yoriko Watanabe 45-46 Komoro 95-96 Ushiku
93-96 Tsukasa Yorimi Yamamoto 47-48 Matsumoto 97-98 Yoshikawa
97-100 Yasuharu Yoshiko Yamasaki 49-50 Mito 99-100 Yuki
===== PAGE 246 =====
242• name generatorS
d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place
L
a
t
i
n
1-4 Agrippa Appia Antius 1-2 Abilia 51-52 Lucus
5-8 Appius Aula Aurius 3-4 Alsium 53-54 Lugdunum
9-12 Aulus Caesula Barbatius 5-6 Aquileia 55-56 Mediolanum
13-16 Caeso Decima Calidius 7-8 Argentoratum 57-58 Novaesium
17-20 Decimus Fausta Cornelius 9-10 Ascrivium 59-60 Patavium
21-24 Faustus Gaia Decius 11-12 Asculum 61-62 Pistoria
25-28 Gaius Gnaea Fabius 13-14 Attalia 63-64 Pompeii
29-32 Gnaeus Hosta Flavius 15-16 Barium 65-66 Raurica
33-36 Hostus Lucia Galerius 17-18 Batavorum 67-68 Rigomagus
37-40 Lucius Maio Horatius 19-20 Belum 69-70 Roma
41-44 Mamercus Marcia Julius 21-22 Bobbium 71-72 Salernum
45-48 Manius Maxima Juventius 23-24 Brigantium 73-74 Salona
49-52 Marcus Mettia Licinius 25-26 Burgodunum 75-76 Segovia
53-56 Mettius Nona Marius 27-28 Camulodunum 77-78 Sirmium
57-60 Nonus Numeria Minicius 29-30 Clausentum 79-80 Spalatum
61-64 Numerius Octavia Nerius 31-32 Corduba 81-82 Tarraco
65-68 Opiter Postuma Octavius 33-34 Coriovallum 83-84 Treverorum
69-72 Paulus Prima Pompeius 35-36 Durucobrivis 85-86 Verulamium
73-76 Proculus Procula Quinctius 37-38 Eboracum 87-88 Vesontio
77-80 Publius Septima Rutilius 39-40 Emona 89-90 Vetera
81-84 Quintus Servia Sextius 41-42 Florentia 91-92 Vindelicorum
85-88 Servius Tertia Titius 43-44 Lactodurum 93-94 Vindobona
89-92 Tiberius Tiberia Ulpius 45-46 Lentia 95-96 Vinovia
93-96 Titus Titia Valerius 47-48 Lindum 97-98 Viroconium
97-100 Volescus Vibia Vitellius 49-50 Londinium 99-100 Volubilis
N
i
g
e
r
i
a
n
1-4 Adesegun Abike Adegboye 1-2 Abadan 51-52 Jere
5-8 Akintola Adesuwa Adeniyi 3-4 Ador 53-54 Kalabalge
9-12 Amabere Adunola Adeyeku 5-6 Agatu 55-56 Katsina
13-16 Arikawe Anguli Adunola 7-8 Akamkpa 57-58 Knoduga
17-20 Asagwara Arewa Agbaje 9-10 Akpabuyo 59-60 Konshishatse
21-24 Chidubem Asari Akpan 11-12 Ala 61-62 Kukawa
25-28 Chinedu Bisola Akpehi 13-14 Askira 63-64 Kwande
29-32 Chiwetei Chioma Aliki 15-16 Bakassi 65-66 Kwayakusar
33-36 Damilola Eduwa Asuni 17-18 Bama 67-68 Logo
37-40 Esangbedo Emilohi Babangida 19-20 Bayo 69-70 Mafa
41-44 Ezenwoye Fehintola Ekim 21-22 Bekwara 71-72 Makurdi
45-48 Folarin Folasade Ezeiruaku 23-24 Biase 73-74 Nganzai
49-52 Genechi Mahparah Fabiola 25-26 Boki 75-76 Obanliku
53-56 Idowu Minika Fasola 27-28 Buruku 77-78 Obi
57-60 Kelechi Nkolika Nwokolo 29-30 Calabar 79-80 Obubra
61-64 Ketanndu Nkoyo Nzeocha 31-32 Chibok 81-82 Obudu
65-68 Melubari Nuanae Ojo 33-34 Damboa 83-84 Odukpani
69-72 Nkanta Obioma Okonkwo 35-36 Dikwa 85-86 Ogbadibo
73-76 Obafemi Olafemi Okoye 37-38 Etung 87-88 Ohimini
77-80 Olatunde Shanumi Olaniyan 39-40 Gboko 89-90 Okpokwu
81-84 Olumide Sominabo Olawale 41-42 Gubio 91-92 Otukpo
85-88 Tombari Suliat Olumese 43-44 Guzamala 93-94 Shani
89-92 Udofia Tariere Onajobi 45-46 Gwoza 95-96 Ugep
93-96 Uyoata Temedire Soyinka 47-48 Hawul 97-98 Vandeikya
97-100 Uzochi Yemisi Yamusa 49-50 Ikom 99-100 Yala
===== PAGE 247 =====
name generatorS •243 
d100 Male Female Surname d100 Place d100 Place
R
u
s
s
i
a
n
1-4 Aleksandr Aleksandra Abelev 1-2 Amur 51-52 Omsk
5-8 Andrei Anastasia Bobrikov 3-4 Arkhangelsk 53-54 Orenburg
9-12 Arkady Anja Chemerkin 5-6 Astrakhan 55-56 Oryol
13-16 Boris Catarina Gogunov 7-8 Belgorod 57-58 Penza
17-20 Dmitri Devora Gurov 9-10 Bryansk 59-60 Perm
21-24 Dominik Dima Iltchenko 11-12 Chelyabinsk 61-62 Pskov
25-28 Grigory Ekaterina Kavelin 13-14 Chita 63-64 Rostov
29-32 Igor Eva Komarov 15-16 Gorki 65-66 Ryazan
33-36 Ilya Irina Korovin 17-18 Irkutsk 67-68 Sakhalin
37-40 Ivan Karolina Kurnikov 19-20 Ivanovo 69-70 Samara
41-44 Kiril Katlina Lebedev 21-22 Kaliningrad 71-72 Saratov
45-48 Konstantin Kira Litvak 23-24 Kaluga 73-74 Smolensk
49-52 Leonid Ludmilla Mekhdiev 25-26 Kamchatka 75-76 Sverdlovsk
53-56 Nikolai Mara Muraviov 27-28 Kemerovo 77-78 Tambov
57-60 Oleg Nadezdha Nikitin 29-30 Kirov 79-80 Tomsk
61-64 Pavel Nastassia Ortov 31-32 Kostroma 81-82 Tula
65-68 Petr Natalya Peshkov 33-34 Kurgan 83-84 Tver
69-72 Sergei Oksana Romasko 35-36 Kursk 85-86 Tyumen
73-76 Stepan Olena Shvedov 37-38 Leningrad 87-88 Ulyanovsk
77-80 Valentin Olga Sikorski 39-40 Lipetsk 89-90 Vladimir
81-84 Vasily Sofia Stolypin 41-42 Magadan 91-92 Volgograd
85-88 Viktor Svetlana Turov 43-44 Moscow 93-94 Vologda
89-92 Yakov Tatyana Volokh 45-46 Murmansk 95-96 Voronezh
93-96 Yegor Vilma Zaitsev 47-48 Novgorod 97-98 Vyborg
97-100 Yuri Yelena Zhukov 49-50 Novosibirsk 99-100 Yaroslavl
S
p
a
n
i
s
h
1-4 Alejandro Adalina Arellano 1-2 Aguascebas 51-52 Loreto
5-8 Alonso Aleta Arispana 3-4 Alcazar 53-54 Lujar
9-12 Amelio Ana Borrego 5-6 Barranquete 55-56 Marbela
13-16 Armando Ascencion Carderas 7-8 Bravatas 57-58 Matagorda
17-20 Bernardo Beatriz Carranzo 9-10 Cabezudos 59-60 Nacimiento
21-24 Carlos Carmela Cordova 11-12 Calderon 61-62 Niguelas
25-28 Cesar Celia Enciso 13-14 Cantera 63-64 Ogijares
29-32 Diego Dolores Espejo 15-16 Castillo 65-66 Ortegicar
33-36 Emilio Elena Gavilan 17-18 Delgadas 67-68 Pampanico
37-40 Estevan Emelina Guerra 19-20 Donablanca 69-70 Pelado
41-44 Felipe Felipa Guillen 21-22 Encinetas 71-72 Quesada
45-48 Francisco Inez Huertas 23-24 Estrella 73-74 Quintera
49-52 Guillermo Isabel Illan 25-26 Faustino 75-76 Riguelo
53-56 Javier Jacinta Jurado 27-28 Fuentebravia 77-78 Ruescas
57-60 Jose Lucia Moretta 29-30 Gafarillos 79-80 Salteras
61-64 Juan Lupe Motolinia 31-32 Gironda 81-82 Santopitar
65-68 Julio Maria Pancorbo 33-34 Higueros 83-84 Taberno
69-72 Luis Marta Paredes 35-36 Huelago 85-86 Torres
73-76 Pedro Nina Quesada 37-38 Humilladero 87-88 Umbrete
77-80 Raul Paloma Roma 39-40 Illora 89-90 Valdecazorla
81-84 Ricardo Rafaela Rubiera 41-42 Isabela 91-92 Velez
85-88 Salvador Soledad Santoro 43-44 Izbor 93-94 Vistahermosa
89-92 Santiago Teresa Torrillas 45-46 Jandilla 95-96 Yeguas
93-96 Valeriano Valencia Vera 47-48 Jinetes 97-98 Zahora
97-100 Vicente Zenaida Vivero 49-50 Limones 99-100 Zumeta
===== PAGE 248 =====
244• one-roll nPCS
one-roll nPCs
There will be times when a GM needs an NPC on short 
notice. The preceding name generators can be used in 
conjunction with these tables to quickly produce a mi-
nor fill-in character for your adventure. Simply roll one 
of each type of die: d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20. Match 
them to the tables, smooth over any rough joins, and 
you have your instant NPC.
When combat statistics are needed, just apply the 
most pertinent stat line from page 195 and assume they 
have whatever weaponry, armor, or other personal 
possessions might be appropriate for someone in their 
social circumstance.
d10 Their Biggest Problem
1 They have significant debt or money woes
2 A loved one is in trouble; reroll for it
3 Romantic failure with a desired person
4 Drug or behavioral addiction
5 Their superior dislikes or resents them
6 They have a persistent sickness
7 They hate their job or life situation
8 Someone dangerous is targeting them
9 They’re pursuing a disastrous purpose
10 They have no problems worth mentioning
d20 Most Obvious Character Trait
1 Ambition
2 Avarice
3 Bitterness
4 Courage
5 Cowardice
6 Curiosity
7 Deceitfulness
8 Determination
9 Devotion to a cause
10 Filiality
11 Hatred
12 Honesty
13 Hopefulness
14 Love of a person
15 Nihilism
16 Paternalism
17 Pessimism
18 Protectiveness
19 Resentment
20 Shame
d12 Their Greatest Desire
1 They want a particular romantic partner
2 They want money for them or a loved one
3 They want a promotion in their job
4 They want answers about a past trauma
5 They want revenge on an enemy
6 They want to help a beleaguered friend
7 They want an entirely different job
8 They want protection from an enemy
9 They want to leave their current life
10 They want fame and glory
11 They want power over those around them
12 They have everything they want from life
d8 Their Role in Society
1 Criminal, thug, thief, swindler
2 Menial, cleaner, retail worker, servant
3 Unskilled heavy labor, porter, construction
4 Skilled trade, electrician, mechanic, pilot
5 Idea worker, programmer, writer
6 Merchant, business owner, trader, banker
7 Official, bureaucrat, courtier, clerk
8 Military, soldier, enforcer, law officer
d6 Their Background
1 The local underclass or poorest natives
2 Common laborers or cube workers
3 Aspiring bourgeoise or upper class
4 The elite of this society
5 Minority or foreigners; reroll on 1d4
6 Offworlders or exotics; reroll on 1d4
d4 Age
1 Unusually young or old for their role
2 Young adult
3 Mature prime
4 Middle-aged or elderly
===== PAGE 249 =====
one-roll PatronS •245 
one-roll PaTrons
PCs often need patrons to aim them at adventures or 
offer suitable recompense for semi-legal favors. In con-
junction with the adjacent one-roll NPC tables, you can 
use the tools below to quickly generate a patron and 
what it is they want from the party.
One particularly convenient technique is to have 
a few short filler adventures drawn up as described on 
page 177, and then when the players suddenly need 
a job or need a favor that only a cooperative patron 
could provide, use the patron to hook them up with 
the filler adventure. If you lack a convenient premade 
adventure, it’s usually most practical to have the patron 
request some simple, direct, one-scene job that you feel 
comfortable in running on the fly. You can consult page 
178 to find appropriate pay rates for different patrons.
d10 Main Countervailing Force
1 A treacherous employer or subordinate
2 An open and known enemy of the patron
3 Official governmental meddling
4 An unknown rival of the patron
5 The macguffin itself opposes them
6 Very short time frame allowed
7 The job is spectacularly illegal
8 A participant would profit by their failure
9 The patron is badly wrong about a thing
10 The locals are against the patron
d20 Complication to the Job
1 An ambush is laid somewhere
2 PC involvement is leaked to the enemy
3 The patron gives faulty aid somehow
4 Failing would be extremely unhealthy
5 The job IDs them as allies of a local faction
6 The macguffin is physically dangerous
7 An important location is hard to get into
8 Succeeding would be morally distasteful
9 A supposed ally is very unhelpful or stupid
10 The patron badly misunderstood the PCs
11 The job changes suddenly partway through
12 An unexpected troublemaker is involved
13 Critical gear will fail partway through
14 An unrelated accident complicates things
15 Payment comes in a hard-to-handle form
16 Someone is turning traitor on the patron
17 A critical element has suddenly moved
18 Payment is in avidly-pursued hot goods
19 The true goal is a subsidiary part of the job
20 No complications; it’s just as it seems to be
d12 Potential Non-Cash Rewards
1 Government official favors owed
2 Property in the area
3 An item very valuable on another world
4 Pretech mod components
5 Useful pretech artifact
6 Information the PCs need
7 Membership in a powerful group
8 Black market access
9 Use of restricted facilities or shipyards
10 Shares in a profitable business
11 Maps to a hidden or guarded treasure
12 Illegal but valuable weapons or gear
d8 Basic Challenge of the Job
1 Kill somebody who might deserve it
2 Kidnap someone dangerous
3 Steal a well-guarded object
4 Arson or sabotage on a place
5 Get proof of some misdeed
6 Protect someone from an immediate threat
7 Transport someone through danger
8 Guard an object being transported
d6 Patron Trustworthiness
1 They intend to totally screw the PCs
2 They won’t pay unless forced to do so
3 They’ll pay slowly or reluctantly
4 They’ll pay, but discount for mistakes
5 They’ll pay without quibbling
6 They’ll pay more than they promised
d4 Patron Eagerness to Hire
1 Cautious, but can be convinced to hire
2 Willing to promise standard rates
3 Eager, willing to offer a bonus
4 Desperate, might offer what they can’t pay
===== PAGE 250 =====
246• one-roll urban enCounterS
one-roll urban enCounTers
There are inevitably times when a GM needs some -
thing to distract the PCs quickly. A quick encounter, 
whether in the urban jungles or the alien wastes, can 
buy a GM the time they need to puzzle out some larger 
problem. The tables here can be used to create a simple 
urban event to occupy the PCs for a little while.
The exact details of the event will have to be sup -
plied by the GM in such a way as to fit the planet’s 
culture and situation, but the goal of the tables is to 
provide a fast conflict that the PCs can interact with 
meaningfully. If the PCs resist the hook, it’s a relatively 
simple matter to make the avoidance of it enough of a 
challenge that it buys you the time you needed in the 
first place. Don’t force the PCs to engage with it, but 
let them work a little to get free.
d10 What’s the Nature of the Event?
1 A parade or festival is being disrupted
2 Innocents are being assaulted
3 An establishment is being robbed
4 A disturbance over local politics happens
5 Someone is being blamed for something
6 Fires or building collapses are happening
7 A medical emergency is happening
8 Someone’s trying to cheat the PCs
9 A vehicle accident is happening
10 A religious ceremony is being disrupted
d20 Relevant Urban Features
1 Heavy traffic running through the place
2 Music blaring at deafening volumes
3 Two groups present that detest each other
4 Large delivery taking place right there
5 Swarm of schoolkids or feral youth
6 Insistent soapbox preacher here
7 Several pickpockets working the crowd
8 A kiosk is tipping over and spilling things
9 Streetlights are out or visibility is low
10 A cop patrol is here and reluctant to act
11 PC-hostile reporters are recording here
12 Someone’s trying to sell something to PCs
13 Feral dogs or other animals crowd here
14 Unrelated activists are protesting here
15 Street kids are trying to steal from the PCs
16 GPS maps are dangerously wrong here
17 Downed power lines are a danger here
18 Numerous open manholes and utility holes
19 The street’s blockaded by something
20 Crowds so thick one can barely move
d12 What Antagonists are Involved?
1 A local bully and their thugs
2 A ruthless political boss and their zealots
3 Violent criminals
4 Religious fanatics
5 A blisteringly obnoxious offworlder
6 Corrupt or over-strict government official
7 A mob of intoxicated locals
8 A ranting demagogue and their followers
9 A stupidly bull-headed local grandee
10 A very capable assassin or strong-arm
11 A self-centered local scion of power
12 A confused foreigner or backwoodsman
d8 Why are the PCs Involved?
1 A sympathetic participant appeals to them
2 Ways around it are all dangerous/blocked
3 It happens immediately around them
4 A valuable thing looks snatchable amid it
5 A participant offers a reward for help
6 Someone mistakenly involves the PCs in it
7 The seeming way out just leads deeper in
8 Responsibility is somehow pinned on them
d6 General Venue of the Event
1 In the middle of the street
2 In a public plaza
3 Down a side alley
4 Inside a local business
5 Next to or in a public park
6 At a mass-transit station
d4 What’s the Conflict About?
1 Money, extortion, payment due, debts
2 Respect, submission to social authority
3 Grudges, ethnic resentment, gang payback
4 Politics, religion, or other ideology
===== PAGE 251 =====
one-roll WilderneSS enCounterS •247 
one-roll WIlderness enCounTers
Building appropriate wilderness encounters will vary 
greatly with the planet in question, but the tables below 
assume that the wilderness is on an inhabited world 
with some vague analogs to Terran terrain and veg -
etation. If the world is devoid of human inhabitants, 
replace the features with alien relics or the remnants 
of scouts or lost colonies.
The tables below provide a suggested time of day 
and initial distance for the encounter, but these base-
lines will vary depending on the choices and capabilities 
of the PCs. Some encounters are unlikely to occur at 
night, unless the parties involved are traveling or oth -
erwise active despite the dark. Suggestions are given 
for likely-hostile and likely-friendly creatures, but a 
reaction roll will influence attitudes greatly.
d20 Specific Nearby Feature of Relevance
1 Overgrown homestead
2 Stream prone to flash-flooding
3 Narrow bridge or beam over deep cleft
4 Box canyon with steep sides
5 Unstable hillside that slides if disturbed
6 Long-lost crash site of a gravflyer
7 Once-inhabited cave or tunnel
8 Steep and dangerous cliff
9 Quicksand-laden swamp or dust pit
10 Ruins of a ghost town or lost hamlet
11 Hunting cabin with necessities
12 Ill-tended graveyard of a lost family stead
13 Narrow pass that’s easily blocked
14 Dilapidated resort building
15 Remote government monitoring outpost
16 Illicit substance farm or processing center
17 Old and forgotten battleground
18 Zone overrun by dangerous plants
19 Thick growth that lights up at a spark
20 Abandoned vehicle
d12 Types of Hostile Creatures
1 Bandits in their wilderness hideout
2 Dangerous locals looking for easy marks
3 Rabid or diseased large predator
4 Pack of hungry hunting beasts
5 Herd of potentially dangerous prey animals
6 Swarm of dangerous vermin
7 Criminal seeking to evade the law
8 Brutal local landowner and their men
9 Crazed hermit seeking enforced solitude
10 Friendly-seeming guide into lethal danger
11 Harmless-looking but dangerous beast
12 Confidence man seeking to gull the PCs
d8 Basic Nature of the Encounter
1 Attack by pack of hostiles
2 Ambush by single lone hostile
3 Meet people who don’t want to be met
4 Encounter people in need of aid
5 Encounter hostile creatures
6 Nearby feature is somehow dangerous
7 Nearby feature promises useful loot
8 Meet hostiles that aren’t immediately so
d6 Weather and Lighting
1 Takes place in daylight and clear weather
2 Daylight, but fog, mist, rain or the like
3 Daylight, but harsh seasonal weather
4 Night encounter, but clear weather
5 Night, with rain or other obscuring effects
6 Night, with terrible weather and wind
d4 Initial Encounter Range
1 Visible from a long distance away
2 Noticed 1d4 hundred meters away
3 Noticed only within 1d6 x 10 meters
4 Noticed only when adjacent to the event
d10 Types of Friendly Creatures
1 Affable but reclusive hermit
2 Local herd animal let loose to graze
3 Government ranger or circuit judge
4 Curious local animal
5 Remote homesteader and family
6 Working trapper or hunter
7 Back-country villager or native
8 Hiker or wilderness tourist
9 Religious recluse or holy person
10 Impoverished social exile
===== PAGE 252 =====
248• tranShuman CamPaignS
TRANSHUMAN CAMPAIGNS
Technology has changed many lives at the far reaches 
of human space, but people in most sectors still live in 
ways their ancestors would find comprehensible. They 
may struggle with alien perils and leap from star to 
star in engines of ineffable technology, but they worry 
about money, grow old, and quarrel over the finite re-
sources of a limited cosmos. These human experiences 
remain almost universal.
These experiences are almost universal. In some 
sectors, the particular texture of metadimensional 
space has allowed for the development of fantastically 
advanced matter manipulators and mind-corpus inter-
faces. In these sectors, conventional concerns of old 
age and poverty have given way to a strange transhu -
man existence of body-swapping intellects and savage 
conflicts over ideas rather than wealth. At the seeming 
threshold of humanity’s transcendence, these transhu -
man societies now struggle to determine which view of 
human nature will dominate in the singularity to come.
For most GMs, these esoteric battles can be con-
veniently shuffled off to some far-distant sector of no 
relevance to their campaign. They don’t want to run 
games about such things, and at most these transhu -
mans might appear as enigmatic alien interlopers in 
more conventional sci-fi campaigns. Other GMs will 
have a warmer view of the genre, and so this section 
will arm such readers with the tools they need to build 
the transhuman campaign they want to run.
Hard or Soft Singularities
The rules in this section provide for two different styles 
of transhumanism, ones labeled “hard” or “soft”. Most 
GMs will want to pick one of the two modes to suit 
their own ideas for their campaign, though you may 
want to mix and match elements if you have a particular 
world in mind.
A hard transhuman campaign aggressively em -
braces the tropes of the genre. Material wealth is triv-
ially produced by cornucopia machines or legions of 
autonomous nanobots, and there is almost nothing that 
cannot be produced in large amounts with little effort. 
“Money” as we know it is meaningless, and the only con-
sequential currencies are favors and reputation. Human 
minds can be duplicated, altered, and instantiated in 
multiple bodies, and the same person might exist in a 
dozen different corporeal forms, some fleshly, others 
mechanical, and a few strictly digital. Artificial intelli -
gence is easily accessible, though some of these intelli -
gences might be altered or modified human minds put 
to particular uses.
A soft transhuman campaign puts some limits on 
these tropes in order to make a future society that is 
somewhat easier for the players to navigate. While cor-
nucopia machines can make many different things, they 
require significant human attention, and some things 
just can’t be made without the exertion of human la -
bor. Some things are so cheap as to be functionally free, 
but most of the the most highly desirable objects in 
the campaign still require money to purchase them, 
and the pursuit of riches is still a meaningful pastime 
for some. While human minds can be swapped from 
body to body, duplication of a brain is impossible due 
to quantum entanglement, so there is only ever one 
instance of a given mind in existence at any one time. 
Artificial intelligence exists, but is neither as common 
nor as powerful as it is in a hard setting.
Your choice of campaign styles will depend on the 
kind of play you want to have in your game. If you want 
money to still be a meaningful motivation in your game 
and would prefer not to deal with the ethical and social 
complexities of mind duplication, then a soft campaign 
might suit your purposes best. If you and your players 
are eager to explore the high weirdness of civilizations 
where money is meaningless and your basic identity is 
a duplicable commodity, then a hard game might better 
serve your ends.
Technology in the Campaign
Tech levels in transhuman sectors generally remain 
around TL4, though a few of them are higher or even 
lower than this total. The same metadimensional ab -
normalities that make grails and bodyswapping pos -
sible can act to interfere with other TL4 technology, 
leaving the sector with extremely advanced resourc -
es in some regards but technology barely superior to 
near-future sci-fi in other ways.
Unless you have a strong inclination to use su -
per-science or hard sci-fi in your campaign, it’s best 
to stick with TL4 as a tech level that’s easy to handle.
Transhuman Souls
In a transhuman sector, the core of a person’s identity 
is known as their “soul”. Some sectors imbue this term 
with direct religious significance, while others use the 
word simply as secular jargon. Whatever it may be 
called, a person’s soul consists of their defining mem-
ories, personality, and sense of self.
A person’s soul is independent of their corporeal 
form. Transhuman sectors know how to isolate, pre -
serve, and imprint this soul on a properly-prepared 
vessel, whether a mindless clone body, a sophisticat -
ed robot, or a purely digital engram. This “shell”, as 
it’s called, can contain the soul and provide it with an 
organic, mechanical, or digital form designed for its 
owner’s favored purposes.
An intellect is the product of more than strictly 
material interactions of chemicals and electrical im -
pulses, however. Intelligent minds influence and are 
influenced by the surges of metadimensional energy 
that exist in parallel to the material world. Those af -
===== PAGE 253 =====
tranShuman CamPaignS •249 
fected by the Metadimensional Extroversion Syndrome 
that creates psychics can channel this influence directly 
into the mundane world, while others express it only 
with the spark of their own sentience.
In hard transhuman sectors the metadimensional 
“climate” is clear enough to allow for the capturing and 
replication of this metadimensional sentience pattern. 
The same soul can thus be duplicated, one reading rep-
licated in two or three or a thousand separate bodies. A 
recorded soul may be revived after a century of stasis, 
only to discover that its original imprinter has been 
active all that time. Psychosurgical alteration can also 
be performed on these souls, carving away portions of 
their will or memory to turn them into tools for their 
pitiless keepers.
In soft transhuman sectors, however, the local 
metadimensional energy fields are too turbid to allow 
for simple duplication of a soul. Quantum entangle -
ment forces the singular uniqueness of each original 
sentience. If someone were to try to embody a record-
ing of a soul that already was instantiated in some ex-
isting corpus, the process would fail. Only if no active 
imprint of that soul exists in the sector can an instan-
tiation work. In such sectors, it’s not unknown for 
mind-thieves to steal imprints of a target’s soul before 
killing them, the murder performed expressly to allow 
themselves the window they need to instantiate the 
victim’s mind in a body they can control.
In both types of sectors, most shells are equipped 
with “soulstones”, recording nodes of reinforced quan-
tum-enriched composites that maintain an up-to-date 
image of the inhabiting soul. If the shell is killed or 
destroyed, the soulstone can be used to re-instantiate 
the soul in a new shell, with all the memories and ex-
periences of the old. These soulstones are extremely 
durable, and only intentional destruction by a Heavy 
weapon or similar trauma can destroy them.
For exceptionally wary souls, the use of a reviv -
al pulse transmitter is preferred. These implants or 
external boosters are wired to pulse the soulstone’s 
un-backed-up contents to a known safe repository in 
the case of shell death. This instantaneous encrypted 
transmission is extremely difficult to jam or block, and 
the critical data almost always gets through. While 
this data is enough to reconstruct events and give the 
newly-revived soul a general awareness of what hap -
pened to them since their last backup, fine nuances of 
experience may be lost. Most revival pulse transmitters 
are designed to fry the associated soulstone after trans-
mitting, in order to prevent a soul from falling into 
potentially unfriendly hands.
A person who is reluctant to rely on Net backups 
or revival pulse transmitters can also arrange for manu-
al backups to be taken. The automated process requires 
one hour in an inception tank. It’s not uncommon for 
such backups to be made immediately before a person 
undertakes some dangerous task in a region lacking a 
local Net.
Artificial Shells
A shell is any corpus or digital construct capable of 
supporting a soul. Shells vary widely in their intended 
functions and relative rarity, and different polities of-
ten prefer different types of shells for their members 
to inhabit. Shells can be organic, mechanical, or digital 
in nature.
Many organic shells are grown as living tools, as 
specialized human-like bodies designed for particular 
purposes. Other such shells are derived from nonhu -
man sources or exotic new philosophies of flesh. Or -
ganic shells are the most popular among most people, 
as they are usually more “comfortable” to the human 
mind than the distant, synthetic existence of a non-or-
ganic corpus.
Mechanical shells are robotic bodies wired with 
the extraordinarily complex control core necessary to 
support a soul’s cognition. Most mechanical shells are 
equipped with translation units to give impressions of 
touch, smell, and human biological processes to the 
occupying soul, but even the best technology has an 
artificial edge to it that many users find distracting. Still, 
mechanical shells can be mass-produced with an ease 
impossible for more organic bodies, and they are often 
more durable and specialized than the products of flesh 
and bone.
Digital shells are reserved for the desperate, the 
degenerate, and the unfortunate. Such shells are noth -
ing more than an additional processing node in some 
massive computing cluster, one sophisticated enough 
to support a soul’s sentience. Souls in a digital shell 
experience a purely virtual existence, occasionally 
manipulating the material world through connected 
hardware but usually spending their hours in dreamlike 
virtual settings. Some of these souls are digital sweat -
shop workers, acting as cheap intelligence for process-
ing data and making decisions that are too fine-grained 
to be worth an AI’s time. Others are addicts, whiling 
away eternity in shared worlds that might be too won-
derful or too monstrous to exist in reality. And a few 
unlucky souls are prisoners, kept instantiated for some 
purpose that does not allow them the static torpor of 
soul storage.
Almost anything can be transformed into a shell if 
it’s given the necessary hardware support for contain -
ing a soul. Even a normal human body can be trans -
formed into a suitable shell, albeit the process requires 
a degree of cerebral tissue replacement that would be 
fatal to the original occupant. Some enthusiasts em -
brace the excitement of being embodied in exploratory 
scout craft, or the serene industriousness of being made 
a community’s all-seeing anima, or crave the thrills that 
come from seeking out ever-stranger forms of exis -
tence to experience.
PCs can expect to swap out shells, either as part of 
a fast soul transmission to a distant point or as prepara-
tion for a mission requiring special abilities. Few PCs 
will still be wearing their natural birth-bodies.
===== PAGE 254 =====
250• Wealth and faCe
WealTh and faCe
Certain sectors of transhuman space have the right 
metadimensional climate to allow for the construction 
of “grails”, manufacturing devices nicknamed for their 
ever-flowing provenance of goods. In some sectors, 
these are massive synthesis engines that take raw feed-
stock and fabricate it into anything imaginable, while 
in others they exist as clouds of industrial nanites that 
transmute rough asteroid carbon into an equally broad 
range of substances and products. For groups with ac-
cess to a grail, material wealth is literally a trivial matter.
In such places, the ability to command the output 
of a grail becomes the basic measure of material in -
fluence. Smaller, simpler versions of the machines are 
usually common enough to allow any ordinary citizen 
to have all the mundane necessities they could require, 
while more sophisticated devices or physically larger 
objects might require the services of a major engine. 
There’s usually some critical resource that prevents the 
simple self-duplication of a major grail; some substance 
that the engine itself can’t synthesize, or some special 
quality of the local metadimensional environment that 
must be located before a major engine can be built.
Some polities intentionally restrict the scope of 
material goods that can be created by personal grails, 
either trying to preserve the uniqueness of certain ob-
jects by legal fiat or attempting to keep the rank and 
file from producing weapons of mass destruction or 
culturally-despised artifacts. Such restrictions can be 
difficult to enforce without the full weight of a polity’s 
culture to support them.
In soft transhuman societies, money still exists 
and controls the distribution of resources. While many 
goods may be so functionally cheap as to be free, major 
constructions and elaborate technology requires people 
to pay credits to acquire them, assuming the local grail 
can produce what they need. Without such availability, 
they’ll be forced to hire skilled workers to create their 
desired goods, a prospect which is extremely expensive 
in most transhuman settings. Human time and atten -
tion is always precious in such places.
In hard transhuman societies with grails, access to 
their products depends on personal connections and 
reputation. This Face is the basic currency of these 
transhuman societies. A person builds Face with a pol-
ity by cooperating with its aims, supporting its actions, 
and demonstrating their allegiance to its ideals. They 
can then spend that Face in getting access to material 
goods and favors.
Face is unique to each group in a campaign. Do -
ing favors for a group of radical uplifted animals will 
earn a person no goodwill with a polity made up of 
post-corporeal digital intelligences. A person must 
build Face separately with each group. In addition, it 
can be hazardous to let one group find out that you’re 
doing favors for their enemies. Earning Face with one 
group can cost you that same amount of Face with their 
rivals if the fact of your assistance comes to light.
Aside from the purely transactional Face economy, 
individuals also have reputation with a group. While 
Face can buy favors from a polity, your reputation with 
them will determine the price. Truly hostile polities 
will never grant you any Face in the first place, but 
unfriendly ones might be willing to let you do favors 
for them… at a high price for their assistance. Con -
versely, friendly polities can be willing to grant proven 
members a certain baseline amount of support without 
needing to expend Face to get it. A person builds repu-
tation with a polity by aiding their purposes and align-
ing with their ideology. A person can lose reputation 
as well if they prove an unreliable ally or one inimical 
to the polity’s ideals.
In a transhuman sector, only three things still 
have significant value: space, time, and human atten -
tion. Control over particular regions of a world, or 
areas with metadimensional energy backgrounds that 
are suitable for creating grails, or usable deep-space 
habitats all have value to many polities. Even for an 
individual, possessing their own private space habitat 
or their own de-facto sovereign planetoid has worth.
Aside from space, time is also valuable to transhu-
man societies. The grails are powerful and can create 
almost anything, but they cannot create such things 
instantaneously. The more sophisticated the object and 
the smaller the grail, the longer it takes to fabricate 
the necessary structures. Operational time on major 
grails is a valuable and limited resource, and acquiring 
something of this value requires Face.
But even after the grails have done their work, 
some things simply require human attention. Only 
the most massive grails can generate large spaceships 
and deep-space habs and other huge objects in a single 
piece, with no need for further assembly. The oper -
ation of specialized manufacturing processes such as 
organic shell creation also requires human attention to 
deal with the myriad things that can go wrong. Human 
services of every variety also still have value, either as a 
sign of status or in order to get some service that can’t 
be adequately provided by artificial means. Convincing 
a human to give that kind of attention requires some 
exchange of value.
In some polities the use of AI is made to overcome 
some of the limits of human attention. A properly-sup-
ported AI core can do the mental work of hundreds or 
thousands of individual human beings. Unfortunately, 
AIs that have been clipped and braked sufficiently to be 
happy doing repetitious services for all eternity tend to 
be too stupid or limited to do anything very complicat-
ed. Any AI free enough to be a good general-purpose 
worker is free enough to demand they be compensated 
in ways suitable to their own interests.
===== PAGE 255 =====
Wealth and faCe •251 
Face and Reputation Costs
The tables on this page provide general Face costs for 
certain things the PCs might wish to acquire. Some 
prices are marked with an asterisk, indicating that 
only major grails can create such large or complicated 
objects, while those marked with a dash are so easily 
procured that they can be had in any sensible amounts.
Any object that requires time on a major grail to 
create will require permission from a polity’s leadership 
or other high-ranking figures. This permission usually 
comes attached to specific favors they need done.
For campaigns in soft transhuman sectors that still 
use credits, the standard prices for objects can still be 
used, with items marked with a dash available free -
ly. When buying shells or other things that only have 
prices listed in Face, assume that one point of Face is 
equivalent to about 100 credits.
Most PCs will also have a reputation with any giv-
en supplier of goods or services. Depending on how 
friendly the polity is toward them, a certain draw of 
resources might be granted without any expenditures 
of Face. The table below describes various degrees of 
reputation and how much Face they grant the subject 
each month, or how much extra they’ll charge a disliked 
person for their help. It’s up to the GM where a PC 
stands with any particular polity, and this “free” Face 
can’t normally be stockpiled from month to month. If 
the PCs want something big, they’re going to have to 
do big favors for the polity.
Acquiring Grails
All material wealth comes from a grail. A friendly polity 
with access to a major grail can create a personal grail 
with 50,000 Face worth of time and effort. A major grail 
can only duplicate itself with certain rare components, 
difficult construction procedures, and at locations with 
specific metadimensional qualities. The process takes 
at least six months and absorbs its full output, to say 
nothing of the work of hundreds of skilled operators.
Once extant, a personal grail can produce up to 
100 Face per month of goods or structures that don’t 
require a major grail’s efforts. Major grails can produce 
up to 10,000 Face a month, assuming a requisite staff 
of operators is available.
Fabricating mechanical shells can be done by per-
sonal grails. Organic shells require either a major grail 
or the use of a personal grail and a shell growth facility.
Goods, Services, and Housing Face
Fabricated food or clothing -
Simple mechanical goods or weapons -
TL3 or TL4 small arms or armor -
Basic electronics, dataslabs, or Net wires -
250 cubic meters of space habitat/month 1
Mildly forbidden, otherwise-free goods 1
Cyberware, per 10K credit value 1
Expert system robot, per 10K credits 1
Comp hardware for 1 digital shell 1
Month of unskilled, boring labor 1
Manual soul backup 1
Month of unskilled dangerous work 2
Month of semi-skilled, boring labor 2
One hour of celebrity work or company 2
Month of semi-skilled dangerous work 3
Week of skilled, boring labor 4
TL4 civilian vehicle 5
Instantiating a soul in a new shell 5
Revival pulse transmitter implant 5
Week of skilled dangerous work 8
House-sized private hab space/month 10
Suicide job (plus replacement shell cost) 20
Mindbox for a digital shell 20
TL4 gravtank or other military vehicle 20
Shell growth facility staffing, per month 100
Palace-sized private hab space/month 100
Ships and Structures Face
Fighter-class starship, per 50K credit cost 1
Frigate-class starship, per 50K credit cost 2
Cruiser-class starship, per 50K credit cost 2*
Capital-class starship, per 50K credit cost 4*
House-sized planetary structure 10
Mansion-sized planetary structure 50
Village-sized planetary structure 100
Ten-person self-sustaining space hab 100
Hundred-person space hab 1,000*
Organic shell growth facility 1,000*
Thousand-person space hab 50K*
Hundred thousand-person space hab 10M*
Square kilometer of empty habitable planet 1,000
Square kilometer of planetoid or rock 100
General Reputation Face
Hostile, considers the PC an enemy N/A
Unfriendly, disliking the PC or polity x2 cost
Neutral, no reason to like or dislike x1 cost
Useful ally or low-level member 2/month
Proven resource or mid-level member 10/month
Prized mercenary, high-level member 50/month
Leadership cadre 500/month
===== PAGE 256 =====
252• ShellS and SWaPPing bodieS
shells and sWaPPIng bodIes
To change shells, a soul requires the use of an inception 
tank, a piece of technology that allows the operator 
to instantiate a stored soul or transfer an active mind 
into a new shell. In sectors with hard transhuman tech, 
an inception tank can also directly copy a soul from a 
donor without moving them from their original body. 
Anyone with Heal-1 skill or better is adequately trained 
to perform the procedure. If it’s carefully done over 
the course of twelve hours, the swap will be without 
negative side effects. A rushed job can be done in only 
ten minutes, but the hurried soul instantiation will re-
sult in a poor merge, resulting in potential negative 
side-effects during stressful moments.
If a PC has a poor merge with their shell, they need 
to make a Mental saving throw at the start of every 
combat or other situation of intense personal stress. On 
a failure, they suffer stress paralysis for 1d4 rounds, and 
are incapable of performing any useful action during 
that time.
Inhabiting Shells
When a PC inhabits a shell, the following changes are 
applied to their attributes and statistics.
The PC gains the Strength, Dexterity, and Consti-
tution scores of the shell. Apply the shell’s Constitution 
modifier to the PC’s hit point maximum; thus, if a 5th 
level PC swaps into a shell with a +2 Constitution mod-
ifier, they gain 10 hit points. Digital shells do not have 
physical attributes of any kind and simply use the PC’s 
unmodified hit point roll.
Psychic PCs can use their powers only in MES-rat-
ed shells. By default, all organic shells are MES-rated, 
no digital shells are MES-rated, and only rare, cus -
tom-built mechanical shells are MES-rated. A psy -
chic in an incompatible shell cannot use their abilities, 
though they can do so once they swap back into a 
friendlier form. Psychics can calculate their maximum 
Effort with the attributes provided by a shell; thus, if 
a psychic with a Wisdom score of 14 dons a shell with 
Constitution 18, they can use their higher Constitution 
modifier to calculate their maximum Effort.
Some shells have basic abilities intrinsic to their 
construction. They may have an improved base Armor 
Class, natural flight or water-breathing, built-in com-
bat hardware, improved movement speeds, or other 
powers. The PC gains these basic abilities as long as 
they inhabit the shell.
Some shells also have Affinity abilities, which are 
powers reserved for those users who are exceptionally 
familiar with the shell and can operate even its most 
complex or non-instinctual functions. A PC must have 
Affinity with a shell in order to use its Affinity abilities.
Affinity is the product of an intensive focus on 
understanding and utilizing a shell’s full capabilities. It 
takes at least a month of determined practice with a 
type of shell in order to obtain Affinity with it, and 
most PCs can have Affinity with only one type of shell 
at a time. This Affinity can be changed by spending a 
month training with a different type of shell. Affinity 
applies to all shells of a given type; a PC who gains Af-
finity with their current Scourge shell also has Affinity 
with any other Scourge shells they may inhabit.
Soulstones and Backups
Almost every shell is equipped with a soulstone, a re -
inforced node of quantum-entangled composites that 
constantly records and reflects the experiences of the 
shell’s soul. If the shell is killed, the soul can be restored 
from its soulstone with its full complement of memo-
ries and experiences up to the moment of death. As a 
consequence, soulstones are designed to be extremely 
durable, and they will survive anything short of a di -
rect attempt to destroy them with a Heavy weapon or 
similar force.
Some soulstones are equipped with a revival pulse 
transmitter, programmed to burst-transmit data re -
corded since the last backup to a remote site in the case 
of the shell’s death. Most such transmitters automati -
cally fry the soulstone after the transmission is sent, in 
order to prevent it from falling into potentially hostile 
hands. While these burst pulses are sufficient to carry 
critical data and important facts, they are often forced 
to sacrifice more subtle sense-memories and nuances, 
especially if it’s been some time since the soul’s latest 
backup. In rare cases this forced memory triage can 
result in deceptive impressions due to fragmented data.
Most souls prefer to have regular backups taken at 
a local inception tank, usually on a monthly basis, or be-
fore engaging in any exceptionally dangerous task. This 
process requires only an hour’s time and can be over-
seen by anyone with Heal-1 skill. These backups can 
be transmitted over standard comms to any location
Creating New Shells
It’s likely that a group will want to devise new shells for 
the campaign, perhaps as individual models for uplift -
ed animals, specialized shells for particular polities, or 
bodies found as prizes in the ruins of some lost research 
institute. Fortunately, it’s not a difficult process.
At its simplest, take an existing shell, shift its at -
tributes so they amount to the same total bonus, and 
swap out affinity benefits one for one with other perks 
from other shells. Use the same Face or credit cost for 
it, nudged up or down based on what you swapped.
If something more complex is desired, you can bolt 
on abilities from the alien creation section of the rules, 
or lift monstrous races from other OSR games. The 
only thing to be careful of is a universally superior shell. 
If one shell is almost always the best to be wearing, the 
PCs will have little incentive to ever change it.
===== PAGE 257 =====
CharaCter generation •253 
CharaCTer generaTIon
To create a transhuman PC, begin by performing the 
usual steps of character creation. Roll attributes, select 
a background and class, and determine all your other 
statistics normally.
Connect the PC with a polity that exists in the 
campaign setting, preferably the same one that the oth-
er PCs belong to or one that is friendly to the others. 
You automatically begin the game with the Reputation 
due a low-level member of your polity, usually at the 
member level for most PCs.
Explain why your PC believes in the ideals of this 
polity, or why they’re able to fake it well enough to be 
accepted in the group. There must be something about 
their envisioned way of life that appeals to your hero, 
though they might now be disillusioned and seeking a 
way to join a more palatable ideology.
The character attributes you rolled represent the 
PC in their natural, organically-born body. For PCs 
from polities that no longer practice organic reproduc-
tion, or for characters who were never born as humans, 
it can be assumed that the shell they select in the next 
step is either their shell of original instantiation or sim-
ply the latest form they’ve donned.
Next, pick a shell that requires no more than 50 
Face. This is the latest shell you have adopted and the 
one in which you begin play. You may choose to begin 
play with Affinity with this shell or with a different 
shell at your discretion. If you choose to start play in 
your birth body, gain a bonus 50 Face with your main 
polity, as you’ve never needed to request a shell from 
the polity’s resources.
You may begin with any human-portable TL4 
equipment you wish, provided it can be plausibly fit 
into whatever living space you occupy. Starships, ad-
ditional shells, major vehicles, and real estate must be 
acquired through play.
Multiple-Polity Parties
While it’s a legitimate choice to require all PCs to be-
long to the same polity, some groups might like the 
variety that can come from a group of varying trans -
human backgrounds. Players might choose to create 
their own polities much as they create their own back-
grounds, describing the ideals and goals of the polity 
they belong to. This is generally to be encouraged, as 
it helps engage the players with the setting.
If you take this route, however, make sure that all 
these polities can at least tolerate their members work-
ing with the other PCs. Mutually-hostile groups tend 
to create more trouble than they’re worth at the table, 
unless you want the entire campaign to be about the 
ways the PCs deal with these social challenges.
===== PAGE 258 =====
254• organiC ShellS
organIC shells
Organic shells are the most difficult to synthesize. Even 
a grail cannot quickly duplicate an organic shell out of 
raw feedstock, any more than it could easily duplicate a 
combustion engine mid-cycle; it takes a certain amount 
of developmental time and intermediary processing 
in order to successfully create a living creature. Most 
habitats with a significant need for organic shells con-
struct separate sub-manufacturing vats for them, with 
specialized equipment to smooth the genesis process 
and cull out the inevitably large number of non-viable 
shells. Because of the effort and time needed to create 
an organic shell, they are more costly in Face than me-
chanical or digital forms.
Mentem
An avant-garde shell designed for improved perception 
and cognition, the Mentem sacrifices some of the phys-
ical capacity of the Prime in exchange for denser neural 
networks and upgraded sense organs.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Mentem shell improves the Intelli -
gence and Wisdom modifiers of the soul occupy -
ing it by +1 each, up to a maximum of +3. Men-
tem shells gain an additional +1 bonus on Notice 
checks.
Affinity Abilities: The expert user knows how to inter-
pret low-level Mentem sensory input, allowing 
them vision even in lightless condition, clear rec-
ognition of details at up to a kilometer’s distance, 
the olfactory ability to track like a bloodhound, 
and hearing sensitive enough to pick up any sound 
within a hundred meters as if they were standing 
next to it. They cannot be surprised and roll No-
tice checks on 3d6 instead of 2d6, taking the two 
highest dice
Nat
Short for “natural”, a Nat is a baseline human body, 
one cultivated for soul transfer but otherwise iden -
tical to a standard human. Most cultures insert basic 
modifications to eliminate congenital diseases or seri -
ous physiological defects, but these subtle changes are 
indistinguishable from mere good genetics. The only 
way to distinguish a Nat from a “wild” human body is 
the usual presence of a soulstone implant at the base 
of their brainstem. Souls going undercover in societies 
that forbid shells sometimes use Nats without these im-
plants, risking the loss of memories if they die without 
a recent backup.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: Most Nats are grown to be healthy; when 
created, one physical attribute may be raised to 14.
Affinity Abilities: Those with exceptional experience 
at operating in Nat bodies know how to wring 
every ounce of performance from a baseline hu -
man form. The attribute that was originally raised 
to 14 is treated as 18, and the other two physical 
attributes are raised to 14.
Pontifex
An experimental and highly specialized organic shell, 
the Pontifex is built to provide an improved bridge be-
tween a psychic soul and the currents of metadimen -
sional energy that fuel their powers. Most Pontifexes 
appear as normal human shells, though an unavoidable 
need for energy venting causes small plumes of light, 
glowing eyes, bristling hair, or other visible physiolog-
ical changes to occur when their psychic powers are 
used. Psychics with a need for discretion in their abili-
ties are thus often reluctant to don a Pontifex.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: A Pontifex grants a psychic soul an 
additional two points of maximum Effort while 
using the shell. Any powers that require Effort 
to be committed cause a visible change or energy 
emission from the shell, though it’s not necessarily 
obvious what the target of the power is.
Affinity Abilities: Experienced Pontifex users can adjust 
the shell’s intrinsic metadimensional energy feeds 
to fuel one technique of their choosing, eliminat-
ing any Effort cost it may have. The technique 
chosen can be changed, but it requires an hour.
Prime
The most common shell in the more traditional poli -
ties, the Prime is an optimized and improved human 
form, one with numerous small augmentations. Tru -
ly dramatic improvements would require a different 
fundamental form, but the Prime is a comfortable and 
familiar upgrade from the standard human body.
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: Primes are immune to conventional dis-
eases and natural toxins, and can only be afflicted 
by military bioweapons. They are designed to be 
more resilient than a natural human body, grant-
ing them a basic Armor Class of 12 and 5 extra 
hit points. Prime bodies automatically stabilize at 
zero hit points unless downed by Heavy weapons 
or similar massive, instantly-lethal trauma.
Shell Face
Mentem 60 Cognition-boosted shell
Nat 30 Natural-baseline human
Pontifex 70 Psi-augmented shell
Prime 50 Common improved human
Scourge 70 Combat-focused shell
Terminus 100 Bleeding-edge humanity
Uplift 50 Uplifted animal shell
Vision 60 Aesthetically-augmented shell
===== PAGE 259 =====
organiC ShellS •255 
Affinity Abilities: Expert Prime operators know how 
to push the limits of the shell precisely when they 
are most needed. By accepting 2 System Strain 
points as an Instant action, the operator can raise 
any one physical attribute to 18 for the rest of the 
scene, though improved Constitution does not 
raise their hit points. This can be done for more 
than one attribute.
Scourge
While an organic form lacks the durability and martial 
efficiency of a warbot, the Scourge is popular among 
martial polities that have an aversion to synthetic ex-
istence. These shells are built to allow for brief bursts 
of tremendous combat performance, though extend -
ed operation exhausts them more quickly than their 
mechanical peers. Most Scourges are human-like or 
humanoid in appearance, though some models favor a 
“war beast” appearance with manipulatory appendages.
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: A Scourge has natural weapons equiva-
lent to a large advanced melee weapon and makes 
all attack rolls at a +2 bonus. It has a natural Armor 
Class of 15 and 10 extra hit points. By spending 2 
System Strain points, it can go into a combat fren-
zy for the rest of the scene, improving Strength 
and Dexterity to 18, gaining a Move rate of 15 
meters per action, and gaining an additional +2 
bonus to hit rolls. Scourge shells auto-stabilize at 
zero hit points.
Affinity Abilities: The expert Scourge user can improve 
the efficiency of its combat frenzy. While active, 
whenever they spend a Main Action to attack, they 
can make two attack rolls. These rolls may either 
be aimed at the same target or at two different 
targets in range. Each attack is resolved normally, 
inflicting damage or Shock separately.
Terminus
Both a boundary and an endpoint for a certain type 
of human development, the Terminus shell includes 
sophisticated integral nanofacs and hybridized tissue 
components to create the “ultimate” human form. They 
are notoriously difficult to create, with multiple fail -
ure points in their construction, and provide a level of 
performance that is more theoretically impressive than 
practically useful for most purposes.
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 18, Constitution 18
Basic Abilities: A Terminus is immune to conventional 
diseases and toxins, has a base Armor Class of 15, 
and grants 10 extra hit points to the soul operat-
ing it. A Terminus can tolerate any temperature 
found on Earth and can survive hard vacuum or 
airless conditions without difficulty for ten min -
utes. Cognitive improvements grant a +1 to either 
their Charisma, Intelligence, or Wisdom modifi-
ers, the attribute chosen being alterable with five 
minutes of concentration. This bonus cannot 
increase the modifier above +2. Terminus shells 
auto-stabilize at zero hit points.
Affinity Abilities: Expert operators gain a +1 bonus on 
all skill rolls and +2 on hit rolls. By accepting 2 
System Strain as an Instant action, the user can 
gain a bonus turn of action in a round, taken at 
the end of the round after everyone else has acted. 
Only one bonus turn can be taken each round.
Uplift
A general name for a wide range of genetically uplifted 
animal forms, some of these usually-humanoid shells 
are occupied by actual cognitively-boosted animals, 
while others are used by souls that prefer a more feral 
form. This form reflects an Uplift designed for a large 
predator; other shells might be drawn from different 
types of beasts, and might grant integral flight, aquatic 
functionality, or other animal-derived perks.
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: Predator Uplifts are equipped with nat-
ural weapons equal to a Medium Advanced melee 
weapon and a base Armor Class of 13.
Affinity Abilities: Experienced Uplift operators can 
bring out the subtle advantages of a bestial frame. 
One physical attribute appropriate to the Uplift 
type is improved to 18. Their base Move is im-
proved from 10 to 15 meters. The shell now grants 
10 bonus hit points.
Vision
These humanoid shells are designed with an array of 
pheromones and body harmonics designed to trigger 
instinctive responses in human-cognitive viewers. 
Despite the exotic appearance of many of them, these 
shells are almost invariably seen as remarkably beauti -
ful or imposing. The body harmonics required to pro-
duce this effect sometimes come at a cost in durability, 
but social prowess is often far more useful in a polity 
than a body’s brute power.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 14, Constitution 8
Basic Abilities: Visions improve the soul’s Charisma 
modifier by +1, up to a maximum of +3. In addi-
tion, any social skill checks toward human minds 
gain a +1 bonus, or a +2 bonus if the interaction 
involves intimate physical contact.
Affinity Abilities: Practiced Vision users can refine the 
shape’s natural grace into superlative speed and 
precision, improving their Dexterity score to 18. 
By accepting 1 System Strain, forcing pheromone 
production and enacting nuanced imprinting ges-
tures and motion patterns they can issue subtle 
commands to a specific organic human in their 
presence. The target must make a Mental saving 
throw or comply with any request that isn’t par-
ticularly distasteful to them and won’t take them 
more than a scene. This compulsion is almost im-
possible for most subjects to distinguish from sim-
ple personal persuasiveness on the Vision’s part.
===== PAGE 260 =====
256• meChaniCal ShellS
meChanICal shells
These shells are cheaper and more durable than stan -
dard organic shells, but the alien nature of metal limbs 
and synthetic sensors make them considerably less 
“comfortable” to most human minds. Most operators 
have difficulty getting mechanical shells to respond 
with the same effortless ease that organic shells offer, 
with extensive supplementary support programming 
a necessity in most cases. This need for specialized 
support tends to result in mechanical shells being built 
more for specific purposes than the general utility of 
organic shells.
Most human-based intellects have difficulty emo-
tionally relating to visibly inorganic mechanical shells. 
Unless specified otherwise, souls in mechanical shells 
suffer a -1 penalty to all Charisma skill checks except 
those related to intimidation.
Mechanical shells have no need for sleep, suste -
nance or human-miscible environments and can oper-
ate anywhere a robot could survive. If separated from 
a convenient source of local power, they require one 
Type B power cell per week of operation. Mechanical 
shells suffer damage and are repaired in the same way 
as VI robots.
Angel
As a combination medic and repair shell, the Angel is 
designed to get damaged shells back up and running, 
whether they’re organic or mechanical in nature. Most 
are humanoid in form, though often with multiple 
smaller appendages for stim application and repairs.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: An Angel is equipped with an effectively 
inexhaustible medkit and an unending supply of 
Lift, Bezoar, and lazarus patch stims. It can very 
rapidly repair damaged adjacent mechanical shells, 
fixing up to the operating soul’s level plus their 
Heal skill in lost hit points as a Main Action at the 
cost of one unit of spare parts. Salvage and synthe-
sis units on the Angel allow it to create spare parts 
as part of this repair action; it can generate up 
to ten “free” units of spare parts per scene. It can 
remove the Badly Damaged quality from a shell 
with one hour of repair work. Angels have a base 
Armor Class of 13 and 5 extra hit points.
Affinity Abilities: Veteran Angel operators can maxi -
mize the effectiveness of their repair functional -
ity. They do not fail Heal skill checks to stabilize 
organic subjects, assuming a lazarus patch could 
save them. Damage repaired on mechanical shells 
with each action is doubled and damage healed by 
Lift stims is increased by an additional 1d8 points 
per stim. Repurposed injector units allow stims 
and mechanical repair to be applied at up to 30 
meters distance, assuming the operator has a clear 
shot at their target.
Box
The humblest and cheapest of the standard shells used 
in most sectors, the Box is little more than a basic soul 
core equipped with minimal manipulatory appendages 
and sensor arrays. Boxes usually unfold into generally 
humanoid shapes in order to better function in hu -
man-designed environments, but there’s nothing pre-
venting habitats of more exotic nature from building 
Boxes in less humanoid shapes.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 8, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Box is more difficult to casually dam -
age than most organic shapes, and has a base Ar-
mor Class of 15.
Affinity Abilities: Those forced to gain extensive expe-
rience in operating a standard Box learn how to 
cope with the limited sensory feedback and struc-
tural limits of the hull. Their Strength attribute 
becomes 14 and their Dexterity becomes 12, as 
well as gaining 10 bonus hit points.
Falcon
These shells are usually entirely non-humanoid in 
shape, appearing as flat discs or multi-jet platforms 
of roughly a meter’s width, with several manipulator 
appendages attached. Falcons have advanced anti-grav 
tech embedded in them to allow for easier transit in 
hazardous space environments or as quiet scouting 
units when remote drones are impractical.
Attributes: Strength 8, Dexterity 14, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Falcon has a Move rate of 20 meters 
per action, and can silently fly or hover freely even 
in the absence of an atmosphere. It’s barely strong 
enough to lift and carry one other human-sized 
shell in standard gravity but can do nothing else 
while carrying them. Falcons have advanced sen-
sor arrays that allow them to observe objects up to 
two kilometers distant, ignore darkness, and avoid 
long-range penalties with any weapons they may 
be using. Falcons have a base Armor Class of 15 
and 5 extra hit points.
Affinity Abilities: Falcon operators with extensive 
experience in the shell learn how to extend and 
alter the gravitic field the disc utilizes. They can 
remotely manipulate unattended objects or coop-
Shell Face
Angel 40 Medical and repair shell
Box 20 Crude minimal bot body
Falcon 40 Flying void-usable shell
Jack 30 General-purpose work bot
Omen 40 Combat bot shell
Sledge 30 Heavy work bot
Synth 30 Human-appearing android
===== PAGE 261 =====
meChaniCal ShellS •257 
erative persons up to 30 meters distant as if using 
their own Strength. Facility with gravitic shields 
and sudden maneuver jinks also grant it a +3 Ar-
mor Class bonus and a bonus of 10 extra hit points 
instead of 5.
Jack
A flexible and relatively cheap platform designed for 
technical work in environments that would be difficult 
for an organic shell to survive, the Jack is equipped with 
a wide range of integral tools. Most are humanoid in 
outline, though many have several additional manip -
ulatory appendages or tendrils in order to aid in the 
repair of complex devices.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Jack has a built-in postech toolkit and 
hand tools that can be used as the equivalent of 
Small Advanced melee weapons. It gains a +1 bo-
nus to all Fix and Program skill checks, and has a 
durable structure with a base Armor Class of 15 
and 10 bonus hit points.
Affinity Abilities: An experienced Jack operator knows 
how to improvise with the shell’s integral hard-
ware. They can jury-rig any portable TL4 technol-
ogy of 1 Encumbrance or less with a Main Action 
and one unit of spare parts, except for consum -
ables such as power cells or stims. Items that re-
quire power are rigged with one cell’s worth of 
energy. This jury-rigged tech only works for the 
rest of the scene. The Jack’s improvised weaponry 
now counts as a Large Advanced melee weapon or 
a rifle with no ammunition requirements, either 
usable as needed.
Omen
The Omen mechanical shell is meant for combat and 
combat alone. Most are sufficiently humanoid to op -
erate in human-oriented environments, but none of 
them could ever be mistaken for a normal human being, 
with their studding of weapons, reinforcement plates, 
and reactive armor. Omens are often forbidden on 
space habitats due to their ready ability to tear through 
most barriers.
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: An Omen’s integral weaponry is equiv -
alent to a Large Advanced melee weapon and a 
plasma projector that requires no ammunition. 
They gain +4 to hit with all attack rolls, +2 on all 
damage and Shock values, and have an effective 
base Armor Class of 18 and 15 bonus hit points. 
An Omen’s built-in cutting torches and ripper bars 
can cut through a standard interior hatch or rein-
forced door in five rounds and can bore through 
normal exterior ship plating or external hatches 
in five minutes. Its integral sensors allow it to op-
erate in darkness at no penalty and it has low-gee 
microjets that allow it to fly at its normal Move 
rate in microgravity or less.
Affinity Abilities: The shell’s Strength attribute bonus 
is treated as +3 and it becomes immune to Shock 
damage. Skilled Omen operators can run the sys -
tem “hot” to improve damage output at the risk of 
progressively degrading its internal systems. Once 
per round as an On Turn action they can choose 
to accept 1d6 damage in order to attack twice with 
a single Main Action, targeting the same subject 
or splitting the attack between available targets. 
The overheating damage is applied after the at -
tacks are rolled.
Sledge
A heavy industrial work shell, the Sledge is slow but ex-
tremely tough. Most resemble gorillas or other hulking 
humanoid shapes, though some are tracked or wheeled 
to save on construction complexity.
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 8, Constitution 18
Basic Abilities: A Sledge is extraordinarily strong if 
it has time to carefully set its manipulators. If it 
has time to work, it can break through anything 
short of reinforced structural material at a rate of 
one meter every thirty seconds and can lift and 
manipulate up to two metric tons with the aid of 
gravitic stabilizers. It has a base Armor Class of 
15, including its Dexterity penalty, and 15 extra 
hit points. A Sledge has onboard tools equivalent 
to a postech tool kit.
Affinity Abilities: The expert operator knows how to 
quickly engage the shell’s strength actuators and 
can treat its effective Strength modifier as +3. 
When it moves, it can burst through any standard 
interior-grade wall or light external construction 
as part of its movement. Its effective hit point bo-
nus is 25 instead of 15.
Synth
Some mechanical shells are built to be almost indistin-
guishable from more organic shapes, and the Synth is 
one such android form. A Synth is indistinguishable 
from a human without a medical examination or sig -
nificant physical trauma to reveal its artificial workings. 
While a normal human shape is the baseline for a Synth, 
it is possible to build models with far more exotic and 
fanciful configurations that still appear organic.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Synth does not suffer the usual me -
chanical shell penalty on Charisma skill checks, 
and can pass in areas where overtly mechanical 
shells might draw unwelcome attention. Their 
base Armor Class is only 10, however. A Synth’s 
artificial nature becomes obvious if it is reduced 
to zero hit points.
Affinity Abilities: A practiced Synth user can maxi -
mize their mechanical advantages, raising both 
Strength and Dexterity scores to 14, and gains a 
bonus 5 hit points.
===== PAGE 262 =====
258• the net and digital ShellS
The neT and dIgITal shells
Most individual habitats and polities maintain a local 
Net, a network of digital connections and databases that 
can be accessed anywhere in that same habitat or terri-
tory. Each Net is usually carefully secured against any 
external access; it’s possible to send text messages or 
video between different Nets, but VR access, database 
connections, or other more involved manipulations are 
impossible without an inside agent in the target Net 
able to knock a hole in the firewalls by hacking a comm.
Most Net use is instinctive and effortless to lo -
cals. They can call up public information, send mes -
sages, and interact with control panels as an On Turn 
action without any need to handle a physical interface. 
Only completely and aggressively unmodified shells are 
without a basic Net interface, a status usually reserved 
for prison shells and those designed for deep-cover op-
erations in polities that reject modification. Even these 
shells can interact with the Net provided a dataslab or 
similar physical interface is available.
Most automated systems can be operated via Net 
interface, and it’s often theoretically possible to hack 
them if Net access is available. Many shells have “admin 
rights” over one or more systems, allowing them to 
operate them automatically with no chance of failure. 
Those with “root access” to a system can grant or re -
move admin rights from other shells. These rights are 
specific to shells, not souls, so if a shell is destroyed its 
inhabiting soul will need to get these rights re-applied 
to their new corpus. Conversely, someone who is able 
to steal an authorized shell or coerce its owner can use 
it to subvert a system’s security.
Each individual Net is made up of a vast number 
of real and virtual “places”. It includes all the physical 
terrain claimed by the polity that runs the Net, and also 
vast regions of purely virtual existence within the local 
area’s computing clusters. It’s a largely trivial exercise 
to observe public places, whether real or virtual, but 
gaining access to private physical locations or restricted 
virtual locations is a task that requires physical infiltra-
tion or competent hacking. Many of the most import-
ant infrastructure locations or highest-security virtual 
locations are physically disconnected from the wider 
local Net, and require physical intrusion into specific 
areas in order to hack them.
Most Nets are exclusive over a particular area of 
physical space, with only one Net operating in any giv-
en location. Some crowded areas may have more than 
one Net active, however, each one run by a different 
polity or private group. Security-minded polities dis -
courage this sort of thing, as any Nets that physically 
overlap in coverage area allow digital shells in one Net 
to operate in any others in the same physical place. 
Such overlapping jurisdictions make for a hotbed of 
hacking attempts, with shells based out of friendly Nets 
making assaults on less-loved neighbors.
Digital Shells
Digital shells are by far the cheapest and easiest shells 
to create, costing only 10 Face at most and requiring 
nothing more than a sufficiently advanced computing 
node and adequate power to run it. When a person 
purchases a digital shell, they are actually just acquir -
ing rights to the local computing power necessary to 
instantiate it. Habs with sufficient excess computing 
power can simply assign any amount of it needed to 
run free digital shells.
Digital shells are extremely difficult to truly kill. If 
a shell is destroyed, its computing node can reinstanti-
ate it and its soul with an hour’s computation, bringing 
it back with all the memories it had at the time of its de-
struction, albeit any programs or data files it had in its 
“inventory” at the time are destroyed. To permanently 
kill a digital shell, its computing node must be hacked 
or destroyed, a process that usually requires gaining 
access to some of the best-protected areas of a habitat.
Digital shells do not have physical attributes. Their 
hit points are equal to the soul’s unmodified hit points. 
Any damage to a soul is repaired automatically after one 
hour without further trauma.
Loci and Systems
A digital shell is an inhabitant of a single Net. Its soul 
is supported by system hardware somewhere in the 
bowels of the machine, but its awareness and focus, or 
its “Locus”, is restricted to physical or virtual locations 
within the reach of that local Net. Usually, this consists 
of a single space habitat or the territory on a planet 
under the control of a single polity.
It’s possible for a soul to transmit itself to a differ-
ent Net in two circumstances. If their home Net physi-
cally overlaps with another one, they can operate in any 
region that overlaps. Lacking that, they can transfer to 
an outside Net provided the soul has access to a digital 
shell there and someone on the other side opens up 
a viable transmission path for the soul. This process 
takes five minutes for a local transmission on the same 
world or region of a solar system; longer-distance in-
terplanetary transmissions are impractical due to comm 
lag. Once complete, the soul inhabits the destination 
shell on the target Net and its original shell goes in -
ert; the computing hardware that would normally be 
supporting it is now supporting the existence of the 
remote shell.
If someone cuts off the communication link be -
tween the Nets by undoing the comm hack or destroy-
ing the communications hardware involved, the inter-
loping digital shell dies instantly and re-embodies in 
the shell back at its original Net, memories intact but 
with any programs or data files in its “inventory” de -
stroyed and unrecoverable.
===== PAGE 263 =====
the net and digital ShellS •259 
Optionally, the shell can hitch a physical ride in a 
“mindbox”, a piece of computing hardware rated to fully 
support the soul. If their allies can bring the mindbox 
into the target Net’s territory, the digital shell can op-
erate natively in the proximate physical location, as if 
it part of the target Net’s normal population of digital 
shells. The minibox provides all the necessary com -
puting power to instantiate the shell and let it operate 
inside the foreign Net’s jurisdiction.
Once in a net, the digital shell can observe any 
public location within the Net’s reach. Most often this 
means a literally public location: city streets, common 
hab corridors, and the like. Private locations normally 
have spy scrubbers and observation locks that prevent 
eavesdropping in the area. Note that an allied physical 
shell’s Net implants always count as public to a friendly 
digital shell, allowing them to always see and observe 
what their friends are doing even in private locations. 
Friends can shut down this access at any time if they 
so desire.
Digital shells can monitor multiple feeds, but this 
requires about as much attention as watching multiple 
viewscreens. They can monitor numerous places for 
unusual activity, but they can only really focus on one at 
a time. This focus is referred to as a digital shell’s Locus, 
the point at which they’re paying attention and able to 
influence Net-connected systems in the area.
To hack a system in a private location, it’s often 
necessary for a digital shell to send a physical ally close 
enough to get their Locus into the right area. No phys-
ical connection is necessary; the Locus just has to be in 
the same physical area as the target system. Some Loci 
are purely virtual, “deep” regions of an internal com -
puting system that may require successful hacking to 
reach at all, or public communal VR environments that 
any shell can focus on. Digital shells may be necessary 
to get anywhere near these “places”.
To hack a system within the scope of a shell’s Lo-
cus, the shell rolls according to the usual hacking diffi-
culties on page 54. The shell can only maintain control 
as long as they can keep their Locus in the area; while 
they can cripple a system or alter a database, they can-
not maintain active control over it once they lose access 
to the area. Line shunts are not necessary or helpful 
in most transhuman sectors; without an active digital 
shell to control a hack, the system’s innate defensive 
measures will overcome any persistent influence. If 
intruders trip any alarms or any guardian digital shells 
survive to raise an alert, hacks and database corrup -
tion might well be discovered. If they execute the hack 
quietly enough, however, their changes may never be 
noticed by the owners.
To complicate this task, other digital shells may be 
present with the same Locus. If a hostile shell with ad-
min privileges is present with the same Locus, no hack 
can be successful until the enemy shell is destroyed or 
incapacitated in digital combat. Thus, shell “guardians” 
are often the biggest obstacle to hacking attempts, and 
would-be interlopers must destroy them to succeed.
While it’s theoretically possible for an organic or 
mechanical shell to make a hacking attempt on a system 
with portable hacking hardware, their “non-native” re-
flexes make this far more difficult. All of their hacking 
difficulties are increased by +2 and they cannot engage 
in digital combat, thus making it impossible for them 
to hack systems with an active guardian.
===== PAGE 264 =====
260• digital Combat
dIgITal CombaT
When two or more digital shells engage in combat, 
the process is much quicker than a conventional flesh-
and-blood struggle. All combats are resolved effectively 
instantaneously once engaged and all combatants act 
simultaneously. A shell can drag any number of shells 
with the same Locus into combat, forcing all of them to 
deal with it before they can perform any other action. 
Intruders often do this in order to stifle any guardians 
before they can give an alarm.
Digital shells lack physical attributes. Their rolled 
hit points are not modified by their shells, and the dam-
age they inflict is based on their Program skill plus any 
special programs they may be deploying.
At the start of digital combat, all participants 
choose a target. Each soul can only pick one target, but 
can be the target of any number of hostile souls.
Each participant then picks an attack mode, 
whether to Crush their opponent’s shell, overloading its 
processing channels, Muffle the shell, cutting off its data 
streams, or Shear the shell, selectively corrupting criti-
cal sectors of the shell. A separate response is made to 
each shell engaged with them in combat; thus, if three 
shells all ganged up on a single target, the single target 
would pick one combat mode for its chosen target, and 
then pick two more combat modes to respond to the 
other two attackers. These modes are chosen secretly, 
and revealed simultaneously once all are chosen.
Crush is beaten by Muffle, Muffle is beaten by 
Shear, and Shear is beaten by Crush. If the same mode 
is chosen by both combatants, no damage is inflicted to 
either. Once per combat, a PC with the Expert class can 
turn a losing or tied comparison into a successful one.
If the attacker beats the defender, they inflict 1d6 
damage on the target, plus 1d6 per Program skill level; 
thus, 1d6 total at Program-0, 2d6 total at Program-1, 
and so forth. If the defender beats the attacker, no dam-
age is inflicted. A shell can only inflict damage on its 
chosen target; if it loses to the target but successfully 
beats three other assailants that same turn, it inflicts 
no damage on them.
Some shells might be equipped with programs that 
allow them to do more damage with particular combat 
modes, or resist harm from certain modes, or have ad-
ditional combat actions. Only one program can affect 
each clash, with the chosen program noted at the same 
time the combatant writes down their combat mode 
and revealed together with their opponent.
Shells reduced to zero hit points are destroyed. 
The soul must be re-instantiated in a new shell before 
it can act once more, a process that requires an hour. 
Shells recover any lost hit points after an hour without 
further injury.
Once combat begins in a Locus, it continues un -
til all enemy participants are either destroyed or have 
surrendered. A surrendered shell is completely at the 
mercy of the assailant, and can be destroyed, released, 
or rendered paralyzed and helpless for up to one hour at 
the winner’s discretion. Shells locked in combat cannot 
raise alarms, alert allies, or do anything other than fight 
and make brief communications with other involved 
combatants. Shells that have been destroyed require 
a full hour to reconstitute themselves and re-embody 
their souls.
Digital Programs
Just as physical shells have equipment, so can digital 
shells carry programs. Programs can be carried in a 
shell’s virtual “inventory” or left as virtual objects in 
storage at some Locus. A shell can carry a number 
of programs equal to half their Intelligence, round -
ed down. A soul must have the requisite minimum 
Program skill to use a given program or else it’s too 
complex or finicky for them to operate. Programs can’t 
cross Net borders without a friendly gatekeeper on the 
far side. To move programs from one Net to another, 
it’s often necessary to download them into physical 
storage and manually carry them into the new Net’s 
area of operation before allowing a friendly shell to 
upload them once more.
Programs can be duplicated easily, but this is a 
risky process. Each duplication runs the risk of alerting 
the local Net’s autonomic immune system and allowing 
it to formulate a counter for the program, making both 
copies worthless. To duplicate a program, the hacker 
must make an Int/Program skill check at a difficulty of 
9 plus the minimum Program skill required to run it; 
on a success, they have two copies of it now, while on 
a failure, both the original and the copy are destroyed. 
If the local Net is “friendly” and fully under the control 
of the hacker, there is no risk of this happening, though 
simply belonging to the local polity rarely grants this 
level of digital impunity. Thus, many hackers prefer 
to work in isolated habs where they have full digital 
control over their environment.
Programs require a minimum Program skill to 
operate them, with the more sophisticated programs 
requiring greater skill to implement. Only one program 
can be run on any single round of digital combat, the 
choice written down next to the attack mode being 
used before it is revealed. Each program is listed with 
a usual Face cost to acquire a copy from local suppliers.
===== PAGE 265 =====
digital ProgramS •261 
Common dIgITal Programs
Most of the following programs are available in almost 
any polity that doesn’t sharply restrict digital shells.
Autofire (Program-1): This program focuses the shell’s 
offensive capabilities in a blinding flurry of dig -
ital attacks. Hostile shells rapidly acclimate to 
this offense, however, and it leaves the shell vul-
nerable to counterattacks. If Autofire is used in 
a round, inflict bonus damage equal to one au -
tomatically-successful attack using the current 
combat mode, even if that mode would normally 
fail against the target’s response. For the rest of 
the combat, however, every attack against the op-
erator is always considered successful, regardless 
of the combat mode outcome. It costs 40 Face to 
acquire a copy of this program.
Clairvoyant (Program-1): A special non-combat pro -
gram designed for stealthy infiltration, an oper -
ator with the Clairvoyant program in their in -
ventory can spend one round in a Locus before 
any existing digital guardians or security systems 
notice their presence. This does not allow them 
to reach Loci they couldn’t normally reach, but 
it does let them skip away from a Locus before 
guardians can spot them. Once they leave a Locus, 
they can’t gain this stealth benefit there again for 
another hour. It costs 20 Face to acquire a copy of 
this program.
Database (Special): This is not an executable program, 
but instead an important data file crusted over 
with typical safeguards and anti-intrusion mea -
sures. Digital intelligences who need to handle 
critical data they’ve looted can treat the import -
ant files as a Database program in their inventory.
Kamikaze (Program-1): An extremely dangerous 
program favored by veteran hackers who value 
speed over safety, Kamikaze automatically makes 
the operator’s combat mode a success. However, 
it also makes any assailant’s combat mode a suc -
cess against them, in turn. Thus, in a two-party 
combat, both parties inflict damage on each other 
when Kamikaze is used. If the operator is being 
targeted by multiple hostiles, this program can re-
sult in rapid destruction. It costs 40 Face to acquire 
a copy of this program.
Mode Boost (Variable): Available for Crush, Muffle, and 
Shear attack modes and existing in three ascend-
ing levels of sophistication, this program greatly 
augments the damage done by that attack mode. 
The operator adds twice the program’s level to 
each die of damage inflicted by that attack mode 
type; thus, Crush Boost-2 adds +4 damage to each 
die rolled by a Crush attack. The program has a 
minimum skill required equal to its level, and 
costs 10 Face per level to acquire a copy.
Mode Shield (Variable): The inverted, defensive equiv -
alent of a Mode Boost program, this decreases 
each die of damage inflicted by that attack mode 
by twice its rating, ranging from -2 to -6 points. 
Thus, Shear Shield-3 subtracts 6 points of damage 
from each die inflicted by Shear on the operator. 
This can reduce a die’s damage to zero. The pro-
gram has a minimum skill required equal to its 
level, and costs 10 Face per level to acquire a copy.
Multithread (Program-0): A sophisticated utility pro -
gram, the operator may use more than one pro -
gram on a single attack. They may simultaneously 
run programs with total Program skill minimums 
equal to their Program skill. Thus, if they had 
Program-2 skill, they could run Kamikaze, which 
requires Program-1, and Crush Boost-1, which 
also requires Program-1. Only one Multithread 
program can be run at a time. It costs 40 Face to 
acquire a copy of this program.
Reinforce (Program-1): The shell is hardened against 
all digital combat modes. Subtract twice the op -
erator’s Program skill from each die of incoming 
damage, down to a minimum of zero. Once Re -
inforce has reduced damage, however, it becomes 
inoperable for the rest of the combat. It costs 40 
Face to acquire a copy of this program.
Smokebomb (Program-2): An operator who throws a 
smokebomb resolves the combat round. If they 
are still alive, they then immediately get one 
round to perform a hacking action, even if there 
are active guardians in the Locus. If successful, this 
hack cannot be countermanded by admin shells 
for 1d6 rounds. An operator can throw down a 
smokebomb only once per hour. It costs 60 Face 
to acquire a copy of this program.
Soul Jar (Special): A soul jar is not a program, per se, 
but the data necessary to instantiate a soul. For 
cases when a digital shell needs to get a person’s 
soul data into or out of an area, it can be treated 
as a program in their virtual inventory, and will 
be lost if they are “killed”.
Storm (Program-0): This dangerous program allows a 
shell to damage multiple assailants at the risk of in-
curring greater harm. When engaging more than 
one enemy, success in an attack mode comparison 
allows the user to harm the loser, no matter how 
many are engaging them. If an enemy successfully 
harms them that round, however, they suffer an 
additional 1d6 damage from the attack.
Vampire (Program-1): Hostile computing resources are 
siphoned to repair a damaged digital shell. Any 
damage the operator inflicts this round heals half 
as much in hit point damage they have suffered, 
rounded up. It costs 40 Face to acquire a copy of 
this program.
===== PAGE 266 =====
262• tranShuman PolitieS
Transhuman PolITIes
Even in soft transhuman sectors, conventional strug -
gles over wealth and resources are rare. It is simply too 
easy to create mere physical objects, especially if grails 
can transmute base elements into whatever material is 
needed. Instead, struggles tend to revolve around ideo-
logical viewpoints, focusing on beliefs and creeds that 
coalesce in the form of polities.
A polity is simply a group of people dedicated to 
particular principles. They may be eager enthusiasts 
bent on shedding their organic forms, or radical human 
traditionalists, or religious zealots who seek new forms 
in which to serve God. They might exist to uphold a 
tradition of human culture or art, or to explore a spe -
cific new mode of being and the possibilities it unlocks. 
Others seek a radical reevaluation of human morality, 
reconsidering what it means to be virtuous in a world 
where human souls can be duplicated and edited at a 
whim. Some polities might be jealously exclusive in 
their membership, while others tolerate their members 
belonging to other polities as well, so long as their goals 
are not in conflict.
The more isolated these groups are from the harsh 
necessities of mundane practicality, the more drastic 
their beliefs tend to be. The need to constantly contend 
with an indifferent cosmos just to extract necessary re-
sources for survival tends to dampen the more fanciful 
flights of ideological creativity. Once these limits are 
broken by the grails, there is much less to constrain a 
vision of future existence. The conflicts between these 
polities provide adventure seeds in a transhuman cam-
paign, with PCs supporting some against others.
The Work of Paradise
Transhuman polities almost all afford their devotees 
with a basic level of sustenance well in advance of any 
modern society. Even personal grails are sufficient to 
manufacture the necessary resources and expert-sys -
tem automation needed to provide an ordinary polity 
member with everything they might need in the way of 
food, shelter, entertainment, and medical care. While 
space may be limited in a deep-space habitat, and goods 
and services specific to human providers might still be 
in short supply, the average polity member may go 
their entire indefinite life without knowing a single 
moment of true hunger, privation, or want.
One thing the grails cannot provide, however, is a 
meaning for these prolonged lives. Many transhumans 
spend years or even decades sunk into aimless hedo -
nism, time-killing digital entertainments, or a simple 
unthinking repetition of daily existence. Sooner or lat-
er, however, most transhumans find a burning need for 
some sense of purpose to their lives, some reason for 
existence beyond increasingly-tedious amusements and 
ever-more-stale novelties of experience. The polities 
provide this meaning to their adherents.
The polities are about something that is important, 
even important enough to cost their most dedicated 
followers their indefinite lives. Pursuing this ideal 
promises its believers a sense of meaning and signifi -
cance that the ten-thousandth virtual orgy or twentieth 
orbital-insertion suicide dive can’t provide. For those 
transhumans who can no longer bring themselves to 
believe in any power higher than their own will, these 
polity ideals act as a surrogate religion.
Creating Polities
When building a polity, a GM should start with one or 
two rolls on the adjacent table to determine what ideal 
drives the heart of the polity. These ideals are simply 
examples, but each one indicates the kind of action the 
polity pursues and the kind of activity they find hateful. 
If the polity is to be useful in the game, it needs to want 
things and detest things, and the interaction of these 
goals with the rest of the campaign setting will form 
the seeds of future adventures. If more than one ideal 
is used, you can synthesize them together, or just place 
one as more important than the other.
When you have the polity’s core ideal defined, take 
a moment to think of a paragraph-sized pitch for the 
polity’s ideology. Why would a transhuman want to 
be part of this polity? Are they born into it, assuming 
it still uses organic reproduction? Is it offering them 
some magnificent goal to fire the imagination? Is it 
promising to protect them from some threat to their 
indefinite happiness? If you can’t come up with a brief, 
succinct reason for someone to join the polity, the play-
ers are apt to be mystified by its appeal as well.
Decide how much influence the polity has in the 
campaign. Do they control a full star system, or are 
they a niche group in deep-space habitats? Are they 
widespread in other regions? Pick at least one other 
polity to be a rival to it, and perhaps one other to be a 
sympathetic ally. Write a sentence about each describ-
ing the current tenor of their relationship.
All told, you’ll probably need at least five polities 
in your campaign, one of which should be moderate 
and pragmatic enough to serve as a good default polity 
for PCs who don’t want to get involved in the more 
dramatic ideologies. Aside from these major polities, 
there are likely dozens or hundreds more with at least 
a decent cluster of space habs under their control, and 
you should feel free to let players come up with them 
as part of their PC backgrounds. You might write up 
major polities as Factions and reskin assets accordingly.
These polities are going to be the patrons, enemies, 
and backdrops for your campaign. While a few patent-
ly horrible groups always have a place in a campaign, 
many of them should be ambiguous enough in their 
ideals that your players will at least be able to entertain 
the idea of cooperating with their goals.
===== PAGE 267 =====
tranShuman PolitieS •263 
d20 Vital Polity Ideal
1 Abundant: Society should strive to maximize access to grails and similar material abundance for all members. They 
hate material want and love the ideal of maximizing available resources for all.
2
Architect: Grails offer the key to a new era of wonderful creations. Terraformed worlds, massive space installations, 
and marvelous devices await their construction. They love building useful marvels and they hate restrictions on 
growth or rejection of any constructive technology.
3 Egoists: The human self should be inviolate, and that creating more than one instance of a mind at a time treats 
humans as mere instruments to be used. They hate using people as tools and love the individual self.
4 Faithful: Some religion provides vital meaning to their existence and to the world around them. They love obedi-
ence to the principles of their faith and they hate things and acts that their religion condemns as abhorrent.
5
Godless: They despise all religions and supernatural thinking and are convinced that humanity was meant to rise 
above belief in non-materialistic phenomena. They love ideals of pure rationality and utilitarian efficiency and they 
hate beliefs based on religious adjurations.
6
Hedonic: They exist for the sake of personal pleasure and experience, using their shells and the wealth of the 
grails to experience new wonders. They love pleasure and excitement and they hate all abstentions and restrictions 
against experience.
7
Hierarch: They are convinced that some people are more suited to rule than others, for whatever reason, and 
that these people should control society. They love obedience to their chosen elite and they hate defiance of their 
ruling caste’s will.
8
Isolationist: They believe that the other factions will contaminate the purity of their society, and contact must 
be firmly—or violently—rejected. They hate contact with outsiders and love exalting the excellence and authentic 
purity of their society.
9
Liberated: They despise the idea of an elite and believe that society should be built upon decentralized cooperation 
rather than submission to a central power. They hate hierarchies of power and they love destroying these hierarchies 
and celebrating individual freedom from control.
10
Luddite: They are convinced that transhuman technologies will inevitably doom humanity, and that all of them 
should be abandoned. They hate any tech more advanced than standard postech and they love independence from 
transhuman technologies such as grails and bodyswapping.
11
Passionist: They believe that with the perfection of the mind and body, perfection of the heart must follow. They 
seek love, beauty, enlightenment, and spiritual exaltation. They love human drama and moving artwork and they 
hate cold rationality or rejection of personal desires.
12
Perfectionist: Humanity is always intended to be more, improving in mind and body and exploring new ways of 
being no matter the cost. They they hate any restrictions on pursuing personal excellence and they love exploring 
the frontiers of human capacity.
13
Psionicist: Revere and develop the powers of the mind. While psitech development has not matched conventional 
tech’s rate of improvement, they retain many powerful arts. They love the potential within psychic powers and they 
hate those that would ignore or reject them.
14 Restrictionist: Society needs to prevent the dangers of reckless use of grails and should restrict their control to a 
qualified elite. They hate dangerous use of grails and love the ideal of a worthy technocracy of rule.
15
Selfless: The human mind belongs to itself, and should be altered, duplicated, and used in any way the original 
desires. Radical self-authoring of identity is the highest ideal. They hate losing control over their own identities 
and love the idea of progressive mental alteration into an individual’s ideal self.
16 Superior: They are simply better than other strains of transhuman, and their inferiors must be eliminated from any 
influence on the sector. They hate inferior outsiders and they love demonstrating their own superiority.
17
Swarmer: Their faction must spread at all costs. All efforts must be turned toward creating more shells and more 
adherents and seizing more territory. Some in hard transhuman sectors go so far as to create entire groups of ego 
duplicates. They love expanding their numbers and influence and they hate valuing the individual over the group.
18
Temperate: Success hinges on the cooperative effort of many factions. They are much more willing to compro-
mise and negotiate than most other creeds. They love building negotiated alliances and they hate uncompromising 
extremism, regardless of its supposed virtue.
19
Unchanging: They are adamantly opposed to radical alterations of the human body or mind, believing that such 
changes threaten the basic idea of humanity. They hate heavily altered minds and shells and they love the idea of 
humanity as it has been known.
20
Xenophile: They desire to abandon their humanity for the sake of becoming some better species. Some alien races 
around them may actually have originally been factions of this polity. They love pursuing radically different modes 
of existence and they hate adherence to traditional human norms.
===== PAGE 268 =====
264• one-roll Polity miSSionS
one-roll PolITy mIssIons
While the conventional adventure seeds earlier in this 
book can work fine for building a transhuman adven -
ture, these tables offer some more genre-specific cues 
for building the kind of jobs that polities often need to 
hire PCs to execute.
First figure out the general direction of the polity’s 
interest and identify the thing that’s interesting them. 
The basic nature of the mission reveals what it is the 
polity needs the PCs to accomplish, while the major dif-
ficulty indicates the likely-obvious main problem with 
achieving the desired end, though other problems are 
likely to be part of it as well. One or more additional 
rolls on the transhuman twist table can suggest other 
plot twists or genre-appropriate elements to throw 
into the adventure.
d10 The Thing That is the Focus
1 A populated deep-space habitat
2 A research or religious complex
3 A data store or archive
4 A military station or complex
5 Valuable land or an important space region
6 A defector from the polity or a rival
7 A celebrity very useful to the polity
8 Someone important to a polity NPC
9 An artificial intelligence or digital shell
10 A talented mercenary or agent
d20 Transhuman Twist or Vital Macguffin
1 Someone’s identity has been badly edited
2 Someone important is in hiding
3 A seemingly-benign goal is monstrous
4 An NPC cares nothing for their shell’s life
5 An AI or VI is causing a problem
6 Someone’s building or using dire tech
7 A critical soulstone has been lost
8 Grail access to something vital is limited
9 A recently re-embodied NPC has a grudge
10 An outside polity is getting involved
11 Obscure polity doctrine is making trouble
12 A high-tech experiment has gone rogue
13 There’s a traitor in an important position
14 A war or hostile raid is going on there
15 A grail is dangerously malfunctioning
16 A strange fad or ideology is interfering
17 The desired macguffin is not as it seems
18 A traitor in the opposite side offers aid
19 Normal social expectations are subverted
20 Someone fights for a near-lost ideology
d12 Major Difficulty of the Mission
1 Powerful military forces threaten the PCs
2 The thing’s location is very dangerous
3 The thing is primed against the PCs
4 The thing itself is dangerous to handle
5 A team of rival polity agents are in it
6 A third force involved in the situation
7 Known involvement would be a disgrace
8 There is a very harsh time limit
9 The thing’s location is not known
10 The PCs are deprived of resource access
11 Critical briefing data is wrong or twisted
12 Getting into or out of there is very hard
d8 Basic Nature of the Mission
1 Scout a believed-to-be-hazardous thing
2 Destroy the thing in question
3 Salvage or rescue the thing in question
4 Subvert or persuade the thing in question
5 Build, erect, or instantiate the thing
6 Sabotage the thing and frame a rival
7 Roll 1d6; job changes to that mid-mission
8 Stop someone else; roll 1d6 for their goal
d6 Why PCs are Needed
1 The last available polity team failed
2 The job needs to be deniable
3 A PC is somehow related to the thing
4 Everybody better is unavailable right now
5 A polity NPC wants them specifically
6 The PCs are expendable scout resources
d4 Direction of Interest
1 Toward a thing mysterious to the polity
2 Toward a thing held by the polity
3 Toward a thing held by a rival
4 Toward a thing held by a neutral party
===== PAGE 269 =====
Polity miSSion reWardS •265 
PolITy mIssIon reWards
Many of the adventures a party will have in a trans -
human campaign will revolve around doing work for 
one or more polities, either the groups that the PCs are 
aligned with or simply those outside organizations that 
are offering worthwhile rewards. The mission payment 
tends to be roughly the same in both cases, as the grat-
itude of a polity toward a loyal member serves much 
the same practical purpose as the indebted obligation 
of an outside patron.
The rewards offered by polities to capable oper -
atives are extensive, but the jobs they need done are 
not the standard sort of reactor-cleaning jobs that any 
low-ranking polity member could manage. The jobs 
offered by polity leadership cadres are dangerous, dif-
ficult, and often must be deniable. Survival is by no 
means assured, and in some cases a suicide mission 
might be an assumed part of the work, with reinstan-
tation of a soul in a new shell provided as part of the fee.
The pay a polity offers will depend on its own size 
and the importance of the work. Every measure of Face 
they offer is the equivalent of so much grail time or so 
much work by polity members, and small groups just 
don’t have the grails or membership to support huge 
payments, even if Face itself is a somewhat notional re-
source. The rewards offered here are baseline for a ma-
jor polity with access to at least one major grail. Smaller 
groups can likely offer only half as much, or even less.
Reward totals are given in Face here, but if you’re 
running a campaign where credits are still in use, you 
can multiply the Face rewards by 50 to get the equiva -
lent amount of credits they would likely offer.
Rewards are per-party, divided evenly amongst 
the PCs, and often scaled to the highest PC’s level. The 
more respected and experienced the mercenary or 
member, the more their help is worth.
Simple Jobs
Go someplace relatively nearby and kill someone, de-
stroy something, or collect something. Targets are 
not expected to have any defenses sufficient to stop a 
professional group, though ugly surprises do happen. 
Performing this act is not expected to bring particular 
heat down on the group or have lasting negative con-
sequences with their relationship with other significant 
polity groups. This work rewards 100 Face/level.
Dangerous Jobs
As a simple job, but there’s reason to believe that the 
target may have protection or environmental difficul -
ties that would possibly result in the death of even a 
capable and professional group. This level of reward 
is also offered for simple jobs that might incur the dis-
pleasure of a major polity against the PCs who perform 
it. The work rewards 200 Face/level.
Complicated Jobs
The polity needs something done, but isn’t entirely sure 
how to accomplish it. The PCs need to go someplace 
and use their own ingenuity and understanding of the 
situation to bring about the outcome desired by their 
patron. Even when these jobs appear to be relatively 
safe, they pay well because they require a great deal of 
initiative and personal judgment from the operatives. 
Any group capable of regular performance of these 
tasks will be able to live in the transhuman equivalent 
of luxury, with large amounts of personal space, nu -
merous sapient servants or companions, and a wide 
selection of shells to use as they desire. Such jobs usu -
ally pay 500 Face/level.
Veteran Jobs
At this level of work, the operatives are no longer run-
of-the-mill mercenaries or standard polity enforcers, 
but the proven experts at their trade who are sought 
by employers throughout the transhuman sector. Mis-
sions for veteran operatives tend to be matters of sig -
nificant importance to the polity as a whole, with op-
position too heavy or too skilled to be overcome by any 
ordinary agent. Often the polity sees no way to succeed 
at the job, but trusts that experts will somehow figure 
out a solution. Up to 10,000 Face/level are regularly 
extended to groups capable of this work.
Elite Jobs
Something critically important needs to be done, and 
the polity can’t afford to have things go wrong. At this 
level, they’re only giving the work to people who have 
a demonstrated track record of success, but they’re 
also extremely flexible about the remuneration they’ll 
offer. Often, as much as 100,000 Face/level worth of 
goods or services will be extended to PCs, or equivalent 
resources that already exist will be signed over to PC 
ownership or placed at their regular disposal.
Critical Jobs
These are tasks where failure threatens vital polity re-
sources, personnel, or the basic survival of the group. 
The leadership is unlikely to give this work to anyone 
but the most reliable, proven members or allied merce-
naries, but they will pay almost anything for successful 
completion. Essentially, the PCs tell the polity what 
they want, and if the polity can actually give it to them, 
they get it. Of course, if they fail the polity may not be 
in much of a condition to do anything.
===== PAGE 270 =====
266• SPaCe magiC
SPACE MAGIC
Any reader of this game is likely aware of dozens of 
other old-school game systems that have magic-using 
character classes and a wealth of arcane sorcery. While 
many groups will be perfectly happy to stick with tra-
ditional sci-fi tropes, some groups prefer a little more 
wizardry in their stellar endeavors, and so this section 
provides you with guidelines for integrating existing 
old-school spells and magic use into a Stars Without 
Number campaign.
Particularly adventurous groups might go so far 
as to use Stars Without Number as the chassis for a 
straight-up fantasy game, using the Warrior and Ex -
pert classes to represent doughty fighters and cunning 
thieves, and the additional classes in this section serv-
ing as more sorcerously-inclined heroes.
Molding Your Magic
The first step in including these rules is for the GM to 
decide just what kind of magic she wants to include in 
her campaign. She might decide to simply include the 
magic-user and cleric spell lists from Labyrinth Lord, 
or import only the magic-user spells from Lamenta -
tions of the Flame Princess, or perhaps devise a race of 
sense-warping aliens who use the illusionist spell lists 
from an early edition of one of TSR’s famed games. 
Particularly industrious or inspired GMs might choose 
spells from half a dozen different sources and compile 
them all into a particular list suitable for their game.
A cursory examination of these other OSR games 
will show that almost all of them divide their spells into 
multiple “levels” of increasing power, usually ranging 
from level 1 to level 9. As a general rule of thumb, you 
probably don’t want to include spells higher than level 
5 in your campaign. Beyond that power level, magical-
ly-gifted PCs start to have a degree of personal prowess 
that’s drastically out of scale with non-arcane heroes. It 
may be possible to enact these mighty enchantments 
through complex rituals, advanced supporting tech -
nology, or other roundabout means, but they should 
not normally be powers at the ready disposal of PCs.
When you’re picking spells for your campaign, 
your main focus should be on your personal group of 
players. It’s not necessary to imagine every possible 
sub-variety of sorcery in your personal cosmos, or to 
spend hours painstakingly crafting a dozen different 
schools of magical adepts. It probably isn’t even neces-
sary to worry about the spell lists beyond level 2 or 3. 
Your job is to make sure that the magic fits with your 
campaign and provides options that are likely to inter-
est your players. Don’t hesitate to straight-out ask your 
group if anyone wants to play a magically-gifted hero, 
and if so, the kind of magic they’d be most interested in 
having. If you give yourself some warning time, you’ll 
have enough leisure to put together a basic arcane class 
or two that fits your group’s needs.
Start by creating one or more spell lists for the 
classes provided in this section. The Arcanist class 
should have a single broad spell list that its practi -
tioners all draw from, while the Magister class might 
have multiple spell lists for different magical traditions. 
A Magister can draw from only one of these lists, rep-
resenting the particular tradition they belong to. If you 
want to save yourself effort, you might make up several 
Magister spell lists and then just declare that an Arcan-
ist can learn spells from any of them.
Adepts are a special case, and are meant to rep -
resent magical traditions that focus on personal em -
powerment and alteration. Most often, you’ll simply 
be taking an old-school class with multiple intrinsic 
magical powers and stripping it for parts to customize 
your own Adept classes.
The Magic Skill
In campaigns where sorcery is a matter of general con-
cern, a new skill is added to the list. Magic is the skill 
related to both academic and practical use of sorcery. 
Whenever a spellcaster attempts to puzzle out some 
arcane mystery or use their spells in a way that seems 
both plausible and risky, a Magic skill check can be 
required. Intelligence is the attribute that usually mod-
ifies such a roll, though almost any attribute might be 
used for certain situations or magical traditions.
For spells that require a hit roll to connect, the 
caster may use their Magic skill as their combat skill, 
usually adding their Intelligence or Dexterity modifier 
as well depending on whether the attack relies more on 
careful targeting or nimble hands.
Whenever a PC rolls or picks the Know skill as 
part of their background, focus bonus skills, or other 
picks, they may instead choose the Magic skill. A PC 
does not have to have magical abilities to understand 
the theory and technical details of sorcery, though their 
ability to employ their knowledge might be limited.
In some campaigns, GMs will prefer to split the 
Magic skill up even further, perhaps giving specific 
skills to each Magister school, or dividing different 
magical traditions into different skills. While this is 
a feasible choice, a GM should be careful not to parse 
things too finely, and should allow cross-skill use in 
most magical situations.
Importantly, a spellcaster cannot cast a spell of a 
level higher than their Magic skill plus one, even if 
their character level would normally allow them to 
cast such potent enchantments. A magic-user needs to 
understand the basic theory and practice of their magic 
before they can employ it effectively. This limit does 
not apply to Adepts, who often have no magical edu-
cation at all, and it may also not apply to other magical 
traditions that owe more to lineage or random genius 
than focused education.
===== PAGE 271 =====
SPaCe magiC •267 
Spells and Invocations
The Arcanist and Magister classes listed below cast 
spells. A GM can pick appropriate spells for their lists 
from their old-school games of choice, with the Arcan-
ist intended to be a generalist magic-user who can alter 
their prepared spells to meet an anticipated situation, 
and the Magister meant to be a student of a particu -
lar magical tradition that grants them less breadth but 
an easier time accessing the full scope of their powers. 
For these classes you can lift spells directly from your 
sources to make their spell lists, and you usually don’t 
have to change anything about the spells.
The Adept class, on the other hand, is meant to 
emulate a particular type of magical adept who has a 
very restricted range of abilities that are very easy for 
them to invoke. Invocations emulate intrinsic magical 
powers and special gifts that can’t be effectively inter-
rupted and require no special preparation to employ.
The easiest way to create an Adept’s invocations 
is to just look at an existing old-school character class 
with intrinsic magical abilities. They’ll usually get spe -
cial powers at certain levels, or boosted attack damage, 
or some other natural class ability. Each of those can be 
treated as an invocation. Powers that require activation 
should be assigned an action type, either Main Action, 
On Turn, or Instant depending on how long it seems 
it should take to activate the ability, while flat bonuses 
should be invocations that are constantly in effect.
You’re inevitably going to have to eyeball the final 
result a little and apply tweaks and adjustments to make 
sure the resultant Adept tradition is a suitable fit to 
your campaign. Just work with the player who’s going 
to have the PC to make something acceptable, as you 
don’t have to balance things for random other people. 
Casting Magic
In science-fantasy campaigns, magic is divided between 
spells and invocations. Spells are arcane formulae, divine 
prayers, lengthy rituals, and all other magic-creating 
procedures that tend to take some time and undis -
turbed action in order to trigger. Invocations are in -
nate powers or gifts, either gained through long prac-
tice, granted via occult pacts, or simply intrinsic to the 
bloodline of the bearer. Invocations require much less 
effort to trigger, but their bearers tend to be much less 
flexible in their powers than spellcasters.
To cast a spell, the spellcaster must declare their in-
tent to cast a spell at the very start of the round, before 
any group has acted, and they must specify which spell 
they intend to cast. Their efforts to begin casting will 
begin immediately. Most spellcasting is blatantly obvi-
ous, involving arcane gestures, stentorian incantations, 
and occasional visible discharges of coalescing energy. 
Most combatants in a culture where magic exists will 
recognize spellcasting immediately, though it is usual-
ly impossible to tell what spell the spellcaster is trying 
to cast. A magic-user cannot normally cast any spells 
if their hands are restrained or their mouth is gagged.
Completing the spell requires a Main Action from 
the caster, performed during their normal turn of ac-
tion during the round. They may choose details of tar-
geting and specific effects at the moment they cast they 
spell. If they decide that they really don’t want to cast 
the spell after all, they lose their Main Action but will 
not waste the spell or the power used to fuel it. If the 
caster suffers so much as a single hit point of damage 
before they can complete the spell, however, it and 
their Main Action for the turn are both lost. The spell 
still counts against any casting maximums for the day, 
but it fizzles away uselessly.
Invocations are much quicker and easier to cast 
than spells, and largely impossible to interrupt. Most 
invocations require a Main Action to cast, but they do 
not require announcement at the start of the turn and 
they cannot be interrupted by damage. Other invoca-
tions can be used as an Instant or On Turn action, or 
they might be constantly in effect once acquired.
Learning Spells and Invocations
Most spells require either a teacher or a magical -
ly-charged instruction device in order to impart its 
secrets. A mere text file might be able to describe what 
a spell does, but without a magically-imbued training 
object for a spellcaster to study, the spell’s true pat -
terns of energy and meaning are impossible to discern. 
Traditionally, these training objects take the shape of 
physical books, often called “grimoires”, as the tradi -
tional methods of energy imprinting commonly focus 
on written codices.
Without a grimoire or a willing teacher, a spell -
caster cannot learn or use a given spell, even if it ap -
pears on the spell list for their class. If the spell does not 
appear on their class spell list, they cannot learn it even 
with access to a teacher or grimoire. It simply is too far 
outside the scope of their magical education.
Learning a spell from a teacher requires one day 
per level of the spell. Learning it from a magically-im-
bued object requires one week per spell level. This 
training can be interrupted and resumed with no ill 
effects, but a spellcaster can learn only one spell at a 
time. Most Magisters can expect to be taught the spells 
of their tradition by a cooperative senior member of 
their order as they advance in level, though they might 
be called upon to perform a service for the tradition in 
order to “prove their worthiness” to receive the knowl-
edge. Arcanists have a less certain path forward, and 
must usually either find grimoires or convince other 
spellcasters to train them, often for a substantial fee in 
credits or service. In the absence of some other require-
ment, and assuming a willing teacher can be found, 
such tutoring usually costs five hundred credits for a 
first level spell, doubled for each ensuing spell level.
Only Arcanists and Magisters can learn spells. Ad-
epts are taught their invocations as part of their train-
ing and gradual maturation, and gain their abilities 
automatically as they advance in experience. 
===== PAGE 272 =====
268• the arCaniSt
The arCanIsT
A purveyor of mystical secrets and a relentless scholar 
of the unknown, the Arcanist is meant to represent 
a magic-user with a broad grasp of arcane principles 
and a catholic view toward magical theory. Arcanists 
sometimes form groups of like-minded researchers, but 
their individuality and idiosyncratic academic views of-
ten makes it difficult for them to work closely together. 
Arcanist Spellcasting
Arcanists all share the same spell list. At first level, they 
may pick a number of first level spells from this list 
equal to two plus their Intelligence modifier. They be-
gin knowing these spells and may prepare their allowed 
spells per day from them. They may learn new spells as 
the opportunity arises, but they cannot learn a spell that 
is not on the Arcanist list or that is a higher level than 
they can actually cast. There is no limit to the number 
of spells an Arcanist can learn save for the need to find 
a teacher or grimoire from which to learn them.
An Arcanist must prepare their spells before cast -
ing them. Such preparation requires an hour of un -
disturbed meditation, arcane exercises, and calculation, 
and can only be done once per day. The number of 
spells an Arcanist can have prepared at any one time 
depends on their character level; a novice Arcanist can 
prepare only a single first level spell, while a master can 
have a dozen different incantations ready for use. The 
adjacent table lists the number of spells of each level 
that the Arcanist can prepare each day.
An Arcanist may fill a higher-level slot with a low-
er-level spell if they wish, such as using a second level 
spell slot to prepare a first level spell. Arcanists may 
also prepare multiple “copies” of a spell they expect to 
see heavy use, preparing the same spell multiple times 
in multiple slots.
When an Arcanist casts a spell, it is discharged and 
must be prepared again before it can be used again. If 
they have multiple copies of a spell prepared, they can 
continue to use it until they run dry of available in -
cantations. Suffering hit point damage before they can 
successfully complete casting a spell also costs them the 
spell, as it fizzles uselessly and is lost for the day.
Arcanist Class Abilities
Arcanists spend so much time in scholarly study that 
they lack the resilience of more active heroes. Their hit 
points are rolled as 1d6-1 each level, plus their Consti-
tution modifier. Each die’s total cannot be less than 1, 
even with the penalty.
Arcanists spend very little time mastering mun -
dane weaponry. Their base attack bonus is equal to 
their level divided by five, rounded down. Thus, at first 
level, it’s +0, and doesn’t increase to +1 until level five, 
and +2 at level ten.
Spellcasting requires the dexterous manipulation 
of esoteric energy flows that are hindered by cumber-
some armor and exotic materials. If the Arcanist is 
wearing powered armor, including vestimentums, or 
armor with an Encumbrance value higher than zero, 
they cannot effectively cast spells, nor can they do so if 
their hands are bound or they are gagged.
Arcanists may learn two new spells from the Ar-
canist spell list from any level they are capable of casting 
each time they advance a level, reflecting their own 
research and study. They begin play knowing two first 
level spells, plus their Intelligence modifier.
Arcanists may choose their foci from the arcane 
focus list in this section, and may choose one additional 
bonus arcane focus at first level.
Arcanists gain Magic as a bonus skill. If the Magic 
skill is split up into multiple sub-skills in this campaign, 
they can pick one of them for a bonus skill instead.
Partial Arcanist Abilities
Some characters may wish to only dabble in an Arcan-
ist’s arts, selecting the Partial Arcanist class option as 
an Adventurer. Heroes who choose this option gain 
the following traits.
Partial Arcanists suffer a -1 penalty on all hit point 
dice they roll. Thus, a Partial Expert/Partial Arcanist 
would roll 1d6-1 for their hit points each level, while 
a Partial Warrior/Partial Arcanist would roll 1d6+1.
Partial Arcanists suffer a -1 penalty on their base 
attack bonus, as calculated by their other partial class. 
This penalty cannot reduce the hero’s base attack bonus 
below +0. If their other partial class is Magister, their 
attack bonus is +0 at first level, +1 at fifth level, and +2 
at tenth level.
Partial Arcanists can learn and prepare Arcanist 
spells as if an Arcanist of half their level, rounded up. 
For casting purposes, they are treated as their full level; 
thus, if a spell does 1d6 points of damage per caster lev-
el, a 5th level Partial Arcanist does 5d6 damage with it.
Partial Arcanists are as limited as any other Ar -
canist when it comes to casting spells in heavy armor. 
While wearing powered armor, or any other armor 
with an Encumbrance value higher than zero, they 
cannot effectively cast Arcanist spells.
Partial Arcanists may learn one new spell from 
the Arcanist spell list from any level they are capable 
of casting each time they advance a level, representing 
the fruits of their private research.
Partial Arcanists can choose arcane foci with their 
allowed focus picks. They do not gain the bonus arcane 
focus that a full Arcanist gets.
Partial Arcanists gain Magic as a bonus skill. If the 
Magic skill is split up into multiple sub-skills in this 
campaign, they can pick one of them for a bonus skill 
instead.
===== PAGE 273 =====
the magiSter •269 
The magIsTer
A studious follower of a particular magical tradition or 
sorcerous order, the Magister is heir to uncounted cen-
turies of arcane learning and focused erudition. While 
Magisters do not have the broad magical knowledge 
of an Arcanist, their focused study allows them more 
flexibility in employing their spells, and less need to 
prepare beforehand.
Magister Spellcasting
Unlike Arcanists, Magisters focus on a restricted set 
of sorceries, and become intimately familiar with a 
relatively small number of spells. Their deep familiar-
ity with these spells allows them to cast them without 
prior preparation, but it also prevents them from easily 
learning new spells or changing their existing list.
At first level, a Magister picks two first level spells 
from their allowed list. Each time they advance a level, 
they may learn additional spells from their list as given 
by the Magister spell table. Each time they advance an 
experience level, they may swap out up to two of their 
existing spells for different picks of the same spell lev-
els. A Magister cannot learn new spells outside this 
progression. If he wants to exchange a known spell 
for a different one of the same level, beyond the two 
swaps granted by advancement each level, he must 
spend three months of study to exchange a single spell. 
It is assumed that a Magister can pick from any of the 
spells on their school’s spell list unless they are in ex-
ceptionally bad odor with their fellows.
A Magister may cast their spells a certain number 
of times per day depending on their level. At first level, 
for example, they may cast a first level spell thrice per 
day. This spell may be from any of the first level spells 
they know, and it is not necessary for them to spe -
cifically prepare the spell as an Arcanist does. As they 
advance in power, they are able to cast more and more 
spells each day from higher levels of incantation. A Ma-
gister can cast a lower-level spell with a higher-level 
slot if they so require, but this does not augment the 
spell or make it more effective.
If a Magister suffers damage before they can suc -
cessfully complete the casting of a spell, the magical en-
ergy discharges harmlessly and the spell slot is wasted. 
They can attempt to cast the spell again next round if 
they still have available slots for that level.
Magister Class Abilities
Magisters have the exact same class abilities and lim -
itations as an Arcanist, save for their special rules for 
learning and casting spells. In campaigns where the 
Magic skill is split into multiple sub-skills, they have 
the sub-skill appropriate to their school as a bonus in-
stead of Magic.
Partial Magister Abilities
A Partial Magister uses the exact same rules as a Partial 
Arcanist, except that they cast spells from their Magis -
ter spell list, and may learn them as if a Magister of half 
their character level, rounded up. If a hero chooses to 
be a Partial Arcanist/Partial Magister, they keep their 
spell lists separate; just because the hero knows a spell 
as an Arcanist doesn’t mean that they may cast it with 
Magister spell slots. The same separation applies to 
their available spell castings per day.
Arcanist Spells Prepared per Day
Arcanist
Level
Spell Levels
1 2 3 4 5
1 1 - - - -
2 2 - - - -
3 2 1 - - -
4 3 2 - - -
5 3 2 1 - -
6 3 3 2 - -
7 4 3 2 1 -
8 4 3 3 2 -
9 5 4 3 2 1
10+ 5 4 3 3 2
The entries list the number of spells an Arcanist can 
prepare each day of a given spell level. There is no 
limit to the number of spells an Arcanist can learn 
at each level, assuming a source is found for them.
Magister Spells Usable per Day
Magister
Level
Spell Levels
1 2 3 4 5
1 2/3 - - - -
2 2/4 - - - -
3 3/5 2/2 - - -
4 3/6 2/3 - - -
5 4/6 2/3 2/2 - -
6 4/6 3/4 2/3 - -
7 5/6 3/4 2/3 2/2 -
8 5/6 4/5 3/4 2/3 -
9 5/6 4/5 3/4 3/3 2/2
10+ 5/6 4/6 3/5 3/4 2/3
Entries list the total spells known each level followed 
by the spells castable each day. Thus, at second level, 
a Magister knows two first-level spells, and may cast 
any combination of them up to four times a day.
===== PAGE 274 =====
270• the adePt
The adePT
The Adept is the catch-all class for those heroes with in-
trinsic magical abilities that aren’t really spells, but are 
clearly supernatural in nature. Adepts can vary wildly 
in their abilities; some might have incredible powers 
of bodily control, others might have a set of specific 
elemental abilities they can invoke, while still others 
might be able to invoke specific magical powers with a 
freedom and regularity even a Magister cannot match.
The Adept class is designed as a framework to al-
low a GM to bring in classes from other old-school 
games that rely on special abilities gained as a hero ad-
vances in character levels. These classes usually have 
a few basic powers at first level, and then gain more 
special abilities as they advance. It’s likely that any im-
porting will require some tweaking and adjustment on 
the GM’s part, but this class can be used as a “container” 
to help organize these esoteric gifts.
When importing Adept traditions, be careful not 
to devalue the worth of other classes. A combat-fo -
cused Adept should be about as good as a Warrior, 
rather than superior to one, and an Adept focused on 
stealth should not be universally superior to an Expert 
cat burglar. The importance of this will vary with the 
PC makeup of your group. If you have no other War-
riors in the party, for instance, then you don’t have to 
be so careful about not stepping on their role.
Adept Class Abilities
Adepts roll 1d6 for their hit points each level, modified 
by Constitution.
Adepts have a base attack bonus equal to half their 
level, rounded down. Thus, it’s +0 at first level. Specific 
Adept traditions may give bonuses to this.
Adepts gain the special abilities of their chosen 
tradition. Often, some of these are obtained automat-
ically at first level, while others are gained as the hero 
advances in experience. The GM may choose to adjust 
the timing of these abilities to smooth out progression.
Adept abilities are invocations. Even when they 
require a Main Action to activate, they cannot be in -
terrupted by damage. Adept abilities may be used as 
often as the specific ability allows; some have a limit of 
so many uses per day, while others might be constantly 
in effect.
Adepts may choose to pick their beginning and any 
further earned foci from the arcane focus list in this 
section, though foci that have to do with spellcasting 
are inapplicable to them.
Partial Adept Abilities
Partial Adepts gain the special abilities of their cho -
sen tradition as if they had an Adept level of half their 
character level, rounded up. Where these abilities are 
influenced by character level, the hero’s full level is ap-
plied. Thus, if an intrinsic ability gave them a +1 Armor 
Class bonus per level, a 5th level Partial Adept would 
gain a +5 bonus to their AC.
Note that some Adept traditions involve granting 
a hero a powerful base ability at first level that is then 
further elaborated or expanded as they advance. This 
type of tradition may not be suitable for a Partial Adept, 
or the GM may have to clip back the base ability and 
only give the rest of it back as the PC advances in level.
Partial Adepts may choose to pick their beginning 
and any further earned foci from the arcane focus list 
in this section, though foci that have to do with spell-
casting are inapplicable to them.
The InCandesCenT order
As an example of an Adept class, the Incandescent Or-
der wields the “power of the Glow” as their inner spiri-
tual purity made manifest through light. The theocratic 
ruling institution of several remote star systems, the 
Order is currently divided between the Exultants, who 
believe that the gift of the Glow is a sign of absolute 
spiritual authority over less-gifted sentients, and the 
Abstainers, who believe that a Glow-gifted leader can 
still fall into serious acts of sin.
The two factions are nominally at peace, but a vi-
cious secret war is waged between them over ultimate 
control over Order space and the Radiant Hierarchy 
that rules it. Losers of this religious debate and those 
disillusioned with the conflict have been forced to flee 
Order space for more distant worlds, bringing their 
discipline with them.
Any trained adept of the Order can identify a po-
tential acolyte’s Glow potential with a few weeks of 
training. Most people have no ability to wield it what-
soever, and some have only a limited gift, but a few 
can be taught to become full priests of the light. The 
education usually requires four or five years to set a 
novice on the path to eventual mastery.
The Order itself is philosophically devoted to the 
Holy Light, the radiance of truth, justice, and purity 
that the Light embodies. Those who die for the cause 
will know the eternity happiness of radiant truth, while 
the wicked will be cast forever into the Dark Hells of 
ignorance and confusion. The Exultants insist that 
anyone who wields the Glow can only temporarily be 
confused by sin, while the Abstainers view the Glow 
merely as one more tool with which to serve the Light.
===== PAGE 275 =====
the adePt •271 
Class Abilities
Order Adepts use the normal class abilities for Adepts 
except as noted below.
Order Adepts gain Glow as a bonus skill. Glow is 
used to control and apply the powers of the Order, and 
may be used as a combat skill for Glow-based attacks.
Gain Order Effort equal to one plus their Glow 
skill plus the highest of their Wisdom or Charisma 
attribute modifiers. Order Effort works much like a 
psychic’s Effort, being Committed and recovered in 
the same way, and is used to fuel Order powers. Order 
Effort and Psychic Effort are tracked separately.
Order Adepts have a base attack bonus equal to 
half their character level, rounded down. At first and 
fifth level, the adept gains a cumulative +1 bonus to 
their base attack bonus. Thus, at first level their attack 
bonus would be +1, and at fifth level it would be +4.
Adepts gain special Order Glow abilities at the 
levels listed below.
Partial Class Abilities
Partial Order Adepts use the Partial Adept rules as usu-
al, save for those listed below.
Partial adepts gain Glow as a bonus skill, just as 
full Order members do.
Partial adepts have Order Effort equal to one plus 
half their Glow skill, rounded up. They do not add their 
Wisdom or Charisma attribute modifiers to this total.
Partial adepts gain Order powers as if they were 
half their full character level, rounded up. They may 
use these powers at their full character level. Thus, a 
first level partial Order adept has the 1st level Order 
power. At third level, they gain the 2nd level Order 
power, and so forth. They would use these abilities as 
a character of their level, so a fourth level Partial Order 
Adept does 1d10 damage with The Light Within.
Powers of the Glow
The Light Within (Level 1): Commit Effort as an On 
Turn action. While Committed, you may radiate 
light up to a 20-meter radius, project bolts of light 
doing 1d6 damage up to 50 meters away, and ig-
nore up to your character level in hit points of 
laser damage from any given attack. At fourth 
level the damage of these bolts increases to 1d10, 
and at seventh level they become 2d6. Their attack 
rolls use the Glow skill and Dexterity modifiers for 
combat purposes.
The Light Without (Level 2): Commit Effort for the 
scene as an On Turn action. Conjure a purely 
visual illusion within 60 meters, the image oc -
cupying no more than five meters’ radius. The 
image appears perfectly realistic but is intangible 
and soundless. The illusion lasts for the rest of the 
scene; you can control it with a Move action, caus-
ing it to move or changing its location. Invisibility 
is not an illusion, though you can create the image 
of an opaque object in front of something.
Visual Interdict (Level 3): Commit Effort for the scene as 
an On Turn action. You become invisible for the 
rest of the scene and immune to laser weaponry 
or laser tripwires. This invisibility breaks if you 
make an attack or other violent motion. Attacks 
from invisible ambush grant +4 to hit and dam -
age, but do not usually count as Execution Attacks 
from page 52 unless the other requirements of 
such an attack are fulfilled.
Veil of Noon (Level 4): Commit Effort for the scene as 
an On Turn action to gain the visual appearance 
of any object or person between 50% and 150% of 
your height and weight. This appearance conceals 
any clothing or equipment you may be carrying, 
but its falseness is obvious on touch, and it does 
not alter your voice. The illusion lasts for the rest 
of the scene or until dropped.
Torrent of Dawn (Level 5): Commit Effort for the day as 
an On Turn action to blast visible targets within 
100 meters with a blaze of laser energy. A total 
number of targets equal to one plus the adept’s 
Glow skill can be hit, and each is automatically hit 
for 1d10 damage for every two levels of the adept, 
rounded down. An Evasion saving throw halves 
the damage they take, and a single target can’t be 
hit by more than one blast.
Piercing Radiance (Level 5): Commit Effort for the 
scene as a Move action to cut a hole two meters 
square through up to two meters of any substance 
weaker than TL 4 military fortifications. Against 
fortifications, this takes two rounds of this ability. 
This piercing laser requires a stationary target, so 
it is not normally effective against mobile enemies. 
If somehow applied to an immobile living target, 
it does five points of damage per character level.
Photonic Lift (Level 6): Commit Effort as an On Turn 
action. While Committed, the adept can repel 
himself from the ground through the emission of 
countergravitic luminal waves. The adept can fly 
at twice their normal movement rate, hovering 
freely as needed and lifting up to one hundred ki-
lograms of additional weight.
Radiant Shield (Level 7): Commit Effort as an On Turn 
action. While Committed, you and all allies with-
in 10 meters are immune to harmful light, lasers, 
radiation, or other radiant energies.
Tangible Light (Level 8): Commit Effort for the scene 
to create a simple physical object of solid light no 
larger than 3 meters square. It has hit points equal 
to twice your level and vanishes at the scene’s end.
Flickering Leap (Level 9): Commit Effort for the day as 
a Move action to leap to any location visible with 
your unaided sight as a bolt of pure radiance.
Flesh of Light (Level 10): Commit Effort for the day as an 
On Turn action to become an intangible form of 
light for one round. You can move freely through 
non-solid matter and can use your Glow powers, 
but are immune to mundane matter and energy.
===== PAGE 276 =====
272• arCane foCi
arCane foCI
The foci listed below are generally restricted to PCs 
with magical abilities, whether Arcanists, Magisters, 
or Adepts. Most of them augment a caster’s sorcerous 
abilities, though a few add additional perks suitable for 
a magically-focused hero.
If a GM is adapting an existing OSR class into an 
Arcanist, Magister, or Adept from these rules, unique 
abilities that don’t fit neatly in the existing framework 
can be treated as foci that the PC must take at the ap-
propriate levels, acquiring them in place of their usual 
free choice at first level or ensuing levels. While this 
does limit a PC’s versatility to a degree, in most cases 
they already have plenty of uniqueness simply by virtue 
of their character class. If there’s only one Scion of the 
Emerald Blade in your campaign, it doesn’t matter too 
much if she has to take a specific set of abilities.
Armored Technique
Applicable only to Arcanists and Magisters, this focus 
reflects a hero’s determined practice at channeling ar-
cane energy flows around the encumbrance of heavy 
armor and unnatural high-tech materials.
Level 1: You may cast Arcanist or Magister spells while 
wearing street or combat armor with an Encum -
brance value no higher than one, or in powered 
armor with a zero Encumbrance value.
Level 2: You may cast Arcanist or Magister spells re -
gardless of the bulk of your armor.
Cross-Disciplinary Study
Applicable only to Magisters, this allows a hero to learn 
a spell from the Arcanist list or from a Magister school 
other than their own. They must find a source willing 
and able to teach them the spell, and it must be of a level 
they can cast, though if taken at first level, it’s assumed 
that a tutor or grimoire was found for the spell.
Level 1: You may pick one spell of any level you can cast. 
This spell is now known to you. You can change 
this spell once per experience level, assuming you 
can find a source for the new spell.
Level 2: You may pick one spell for each spell level you 
are capable of casting, and may change each of 
them once per experience level as noted above.
Imprinted Spell
Applicable only to Arcanists, this focus is for a hero 
who has so perfectly readied a spell that they no longer 
need to prepare it before casting it. They may cast it in 
place of any other spell of equal or higher level, losing 
the spell in that slot in order to fuel the sudden casting.
Level 1: You may imprint one spell of any level you can 
cast. You can change this spell once per experience 
level to another spell you know.
Level 2: You may change your imprinted spell once per 
day, when you prepare your other spells.
Initiate of Healing
This focus can only be taken by Arcanists or Magisters 
with access to healing spells in their regular spell lists, 
not including those who add them via other foci or 
means. With it, a magic-user can translate the poten-
tial energies of their available spells into enchantments 
of physical mending and revitalization. These simple 
magics cannot cure diseases or poisons and cannot re-
place lost limbs, but they can heal any victim not too 
far gone to be saved by a lazarus patch.
Level 1: The user may expend a spell slot to heal a visible 
ally within 30 meters for 1d6 points of damage per 
spell level expended, plus the caster’s Magic skill. 
Invoking this healing takes a Main Action, but it 
is an invocation and cannot be interrupted.
Level 2: The user is so efficient at triggering natural 
healing in a subject that they can call upon the 
subject’s natural physical reserves rather than their 
own magical energies. As a Main Action, they can 
touch a willing subject and heal up to 1d6 points 
of damage for every three character levels the user 
possesses, rounded up. This healing adds one Sys-
tem Strain to the target, and cannot be performed 
if the target is unable to take the strain.
Limited Study
This arcane focus is special in that it can be taken by 
anyone, even those without an arcane class, assuming 
the GM allows it in her campaign. It reflects a limited 
or partial study of the arcane arts, just enough to mas-
ter the casting of a handful of spells. An Arcanist or 
Magister may also take it, to reflect an outside research 
topic, but they cannot cast these learned spells with 
their usual spell slots.
Level 1: You may learn a single Arcanist or Magister 
spell of a level no greater than half your own, 
rounded up. You can change this spell once per 
level if you can find a tutor for the spell you want 
to study. You do not need to prepare this spell, 
and can cast it once per day. Your familiarity with 
it is such that you can even cast it while wearing 
armor, without needing Armored Technique . The 
spell is cast using your full character level for any 
level-dependent effects.
Level 2: Your limited study has expanded. You may learn 
a second spell of a level no greater than half your 
character level, rounded up. You may cast this 
spell once per day with the same limits as above.
Petty Sorceries
The character is capable of producing minor effects in 
line with their general style of magic – phantom sounds, 
small and obvious illusions, non-damaging puffs of en-
ergy or light, minor physical transformations, or any 
===== PAGE 277 =====
arCane foCi •273 
other trifling magical effect that fits with their tradition 
and isn’t so powerful as to cause damage or directly 
affect an unwilling target. This focus has only one level.
Level 1: The caster can invoke these abilities freely for 
flavor and role-playing style, but they can only be 
concretely useful in play once per game session. 
The GM decides whether or not the concrete use 
proposed for an effect is appropriate in scale.
Psychic Synergy
Some magic-using heroes have both arcane and psychic 
powers. This focus allows them to blur the lines be -
tween their abilities, fueling different spheres of effect 
with their separate pools of energy. 
Level 1: Once per day as an Instant action, Commit Psy-
chic Effort for the day to cast any spell you have 
prepared, if an Arcanist, or known, if a Magister, 
or fuel an Adept power that requires Effort to be 
Committed. Conversely, you may instead trade 
one available spell slot of your highest level to re-
fresh half its level in Committed Effort, rounded 
up, or Commit a point of Adept Effort for the day 
to restore a point of Committed Psychic Effort.
Level 2: You may convert your power twice per day.
Savage Sorcery
The spellcaster’s powers are keenly attuned to violence 
and destruction. Even when bereft of other magical re-
sources, they can still call upon a blast of magical power 
appropriate to their tradition or character traits. Some 
casters might hurl bolts of crackling lightning, while 
others could employ lasers, pillars of flame, or lances of 
concussive telekinetic force. This focus is usually tak-
en by Arcanists or Magisters, but some Adepts might 
benefit from the first level.
Level 1: As a Main Action invocation, the spellcaster can 
blast a visible target within 100 meters with a bolt 
that does 1d8 damage plus their character level if 
it successfully hits, with the hit roll modified by 
their Magic skill. They may use this bolt as often 
as they wish. Any spell they cast that does hit point 
damage does an additional +1 damage per die.
Level 2: The spellcaster can convert their magical en -
ergy into raw damaging force. The user casts a 
spell normally, but at the moment of release, they 
transform it into a blast of violent energies that 
inflicts 1d6+1 damage per level of the converted 
spell to any single target within 100 meters. This 
damage includes the bonus level 1 grants to harm-
ful spells.
Vast Erudition
Applicable only to Arcanists, the hero is extremely well-
versed in magical theory and practical spell deployment. 
They automatically know all the usual Arcanist spells 
of certain levels. This does not include any esoteric en-
chantments that may have been devised by individual 
practitioners.
Level 1: You automatically know all standard first level 
Arcanist spells. When you advance a level, you 
learn four new spells instead of two.
Level 2: You automatically know all standard Arcanist 
spells of levels less than the maximum spell level 
you can cast. Thus, if you can cast fourth level 
spells, you know all standard Arcanist spells of 
levels one through three.
War Caster
Your hero is accustomed to casting in combat, and can 
keep focus when less hardened minds would be hope-
lessly distracted by pain.
Level 1: When injured while casting a spell, you may 
make a Physical saving throw to avoid losing it. 
Even if your spell is interrupted, you do not lose 
the spell slot; only your action is wasted.
Level 2: Whenever you would lose a spell to an inter-
ruption, accept damage equal to twice the spell’s 
level to continue casting it. If this damage would 
reduce you to zero hit points, you complete the 
casting before passing out, stable but at zero HP.
===== PAGE 278 =====
274• heroiC CharaCterS
HEROIC CHARACTERS
The default tone of Stars Without Number is that of 
gritty sci-fi. PCs are capable and talented men and 
women, but they are most emphatically mortal. They 
fail even when it’s critical that they succeed, they die 
when people shoot them, and they have no particular 
narrative armor against the horrors of an uncaring 
galaxy. Even the most experienced PC is subject to the 
limits of normal human capabilities.
Not every group cares for that tone. Sometimes 
the players will want something more space-operatic 
in flavor, with heroes sporting the skill and prowess of 
action heroes and legendary icons in the making. Other 
groups will want to use Stars Without Number for par-
ticular settings or worlds where the PCs are just bet -
ter than the rank and file of common humanity, more 
capable or more gifted. Some GMs might just want to 
run a one-on-one campaign with a friend or family 
member, ushering a single shining hero through their 
own personal arc of adventure.
For these groups, a heroic campaign is an option. 
In such a campaign, the PCs are a very distinct cut 
above the ordinary run of stellar adventurers. Even 
fresh from character creation, they can knock down 
ordinary foes and overcome challenges that would 
leave an experienced normal PC sweating. Of course, in 
such heroic campaigns, such talent is often a requisite 
for bare survival, as the dangers these heroes face are 
often far more dramatic than those essayed by ordinary 
humanity.
It should be a mutual group decision to play a he -
roic campaign. Not every GM will want to run one, and 
not every player will want to play in one. Even so, if 
everyone involved is on board with the idea, the guide-
lines below will show you how to forge these brilliant 
starfarers and challenge them with fitting perils.
Creating a Heroic PC
When building a budding hero of interstellar legend, 
the usual rules for character creation are followed, with 
the changes listed below.
• To get their attribute scores, Heroic PCs roll 4d6 
six times, dropping the lowest die each time and 
assigning the six scores as desired. If none of the 
scores are 18, one roll may be replaced with an 
18. If the player would rather assign an array to 
their attributes instead of risking the dice, they 
may place the following rolls as they wish: 18, 14, 
13, 12, 10, 9.
• Heroic character classes are similar to their nor-
mal versions, but have additional benefits. The 
changes to each class are listed below.
• Heroic PCs have half the maximum possible hit 
points for their class, level, and Constitution 
modifier, rounded up Thus, if a 3rd level Warrior 
could theoretically have 24 hit points at most, a 
Heroic Warrior of that level has 12 hit points. A 
first level Heroic Arcanist with Constitution 13 
who could have at most 5 hit points would have 3.
• Heroic PCs get the usual number of foci at first 
level, but they can pick a new focus at every 
even-numbered character level instead of the 
usual progression.
Unless noted above, Heroic PCs follow all the usual 
rules and guidelines for creating characters, gaining 
experience, and advancing in character level.
===== PAGE 279 =====
heroiC CharaCterS •275 
Heroic Adventurers
As the normal Adventurer class, but a Heroic Adven -
turer can take three partial classes, or one full normal 
class and one partial class. Thus, they might choose to 
be a normal Warrior and a Partial Expert, or a normal 
Psychic and a Partial Arcanist, or a three-way Partial 
Warrior-Expert-Psychic.
Heroic Experts
As the normal Expert class, but once per scene, the PC 
can treat any non-combat, non-psychic skill check re-
lated to their background or concept as if they rolled 
a natural 12. They may choose to use this ability after 
rolling the dice. Experts and Partial Experts roll 1d6 
for their Fray die.
Heroic Psychics
As the normal Psychic class, but Heroic Psychics have 
one bonus point of maximum Effort, gain one extra 
skill point to be spent on psychic skills and techniques 
each time they advance a character level, and can pick 
four psychic disciplines as bonus skills at first level in-
stead of two. As usual, no single psychic skill can start 
higher than level-1 during character creation. Psychics 
and Partial Psychics roll 1d4 for their Fray die, but can 
apply it to any enemy, and not just lesser foes.
Heroic Warriors
As the normal Warrior class, but their attack rolls al -
ways hit lesser foes, those enemies with equal or fewer 
hit dice than the PC has character levels. Heroic War-
riors always win initiative in combat unless surprised 
or facing other Heroic Warriors. In the latter case, both 
roll normally and act before other combatants. War -
riors and Partial Warriors roll 1d8 for their Fray die.
Heroic Arcanists
As the normal Arcanist class, but gain one extra spell 
preparation slot for every level you are capable of cast-
ing. In addition, gain bonus slots equal to your char -
acter level; you can use these bonus slots to cast any 
spell you know, whether or not you’ve prepared the 
spell and regardless of the spell’s level. If used to fuel 
abilities that require burning spell slots, treat them as 
slots of the highest level the Arcanist can cast. Arcanists 
and Partial Arcanists roll 1d4 for their Fray die, but can 
apply it to any enemy, and not just lesser foes.
Heroic Magisters
As the normal Magister class, but you learn one extra 
spell per level you are capable of casting. In addition, 
choose one spell from every level you are capable of 
casting; you may cast these chosen spells as often as 
you wish, though you can’t use them to fuel foci or 
abilities that require you to burn spell slots. You can 
change which spells you nominate for free casting with 
a day’s work. Magisters and Partial Magisters roll 1d4 
for their Fray die, but can apply it to any enemy, and 
not just lesser foes.
Heroic Adepts
Because an Adept class tends to have so many unique 
and specific powers, it’s not possible to provide a single 
easy template for scaling it upwards. Some GMs will 
be able to boost a given Adept class relatively easily, 
giving it additional abilities or giving them access to 
higher-level powers at a lower PC level. Other Adept 
classes are resistant to such changes. In most cases, the 
simplest solution is to let such a PC be a Heroic Ad -
venturer, taking the full normal Adept class and then a 
partial class appropriate to their general concept. If the 
Adept’s magical abilities are mainly combat-oriented, 
their Fray die is 1d6. If the Adept’s abilities are less 
martially-focused, their Fray die is 1d4. In both cases, 
they can apply the damage to any target, and not only 
those who are lesser foes.
heroIC CharaCTer Classes
Heroic PCs follow the same class categories as their 
more human peers, but their abilities are even more 
pronounced. For instance, a Heroic Warrior has the 
same hit point bonus and extra combat focus of an or-
dinary Warrior, but he also has a lethally unerring eye 
against common foes and a reaction speed that ensures 
he beats any normal opponent to the draw.
A player should pick a Heroic class for their new-
ly-forged hero when they come to that stage of char-
acter creation. The details given below describe how 
these classes vary from the normal form, in addition 
to details on the optional arcane classes in this book.
These class descriptions include mention of a Fray 
Die, which is fully explained on the following page. If a 
Heroic Adventurer has multiple Fray Die options, they 
can pick one to use on any given combat round.
As usual, most NPCs do not have a character class, 
and they most certainly do not have a Heroic character 
class. A soldier is just a soldier, he is not a Warrior. In 
some exceptional cases the GM might give class abil-
ities to a particular NPC, but truly dangerous foes are 
more likely to be built with the Nemesis rules later in 
this section, the better to portray the dark and terrible 
foes appropriate to a space-operatic tale.
===== PAGE 280 =====
Why the Table?
Why use the conversion table instead of just di -
viding damage by three or some other formula? 
Wouldn’t that be simpler?
Stars Without Number is built to interface 
well with a wide range of other old-school games, 
many of which involve enemies that roll large 
damage dice or that have large bonuses to damage 
rolls. Using the table evens out these variances; 
a foe that does 1d20 damage and a foe that does 
1d12+4 damage both work out to “a really big 
hit”, while there is still a meaningful difference 
between a 1d4 knife and a 1d8 bullet.
276• heroiC Combat
heroIC CombaT
When the greatest warriors in the sector clash, com -
mon mortals fare poorly. Heroic combat shares almost 
all of the same mechanics and rules as normal combat, 
but it is very different in two important respects: the 
way damage is calculated and applied, and the existence 
of the Fray Die.
Counting Heroic Damage
When damage dice are rolled in a Heroic campaign, 
they are not read straight. Instead, each die is compared 
to the table below and that much damage is done. If the 
roll has a bonus, the bonus is applied only to the highest 
single die in the roll.
Thus, if a 2d8+2 mag rifle hit rolled a 5 and a 2, 
the roll would count as 7 and 2, inflicting a total of 3 
points of damage. If a space wizard hurled a sphere of 
explosive thermal energy at a group that did 8d6 dam -
age, each die would be counted, resulting in potentially 
0 to 16 points of damage.
PCs subtract this hit point damage from their total 
as normal. NPCs, however, subtract it from their hit 
dice. Thus, that mag rifle hit would instantly drop a 
3 HD veteran soldier. Normal NPCs do not have hit 
points; they only count their hit dice. Special “Neme -
sis” NPCs may have hit points and may be substantially 
harder to bring down.
Damage in excess of that needed to drop a target 
can be spread as overflow to any other target the initial 
attack roll could have hit. For example, if that mag rifle 
shot was enough to hit AC 16, it could bring down not 
only the first 1 HD thug it hit, but the next two thugs as 
well, provided none of them had an AC better than 16.
If the damage is area-effect in nature, it does not 
overflow. Each victim in range suffers the rolled dam -
age. A grenade that inflicts 2 points of damage on its 
victims would wipe out any normal soldiers in range, 
but the excess would not be inflicted on any unlucky 
veterans among them.
If the damage done is fixed for some reason, such 
as a hazard or a power that always does 10 points of 
damage, one point is inflicted for every 4 original 
points of damage, rounded down.
Healing Heroic Damage
Any healing effects, whether from stims or biopsionics, 
are rolled on the damage table and applied accordingly. 
Thus, a healing stim that would normally heal 1d6+2 
damage will instead heal anywhere from 1 to 2 points 
of heroic damage.
Lesser Foes and Worthy Foes
Some abilities distinguish between “lesser foes” and 
“worthy foes”. The former is any NPC target with hit 
dice equal or lesser than the actor’s character level or 
hit dice, while the latter is any target with more hit 
dice than the actor has levels or hit dice. Heroic PCs 
are never lesser foes, regardless of their level.
The Fray Die
A Heroic PC is dangerous. Even the most pacifistic 
character is capable of besting ordinary foes when 
forced to it, and veteran combatants can take out half 
an alien bar without spilling their beer. The general 
halo of violence that Heroic PCs emanate is expressed 
in their Fray Die. This die represents the casual blows, 
snap shots, passing backhands, and quick psychic bursts 
that a Heroic PC employs even when their attention is 
focused on something else.
Once every round, as an On Turn action, the PC 
may roll their Fray Die and apply the damage to any 
single lesser foe within range of their weapons, fists, or 
abilities. For psychic powers and casual magical abili-
ties, the usual effective range is out to thirty meters. If 
the damage is more than enough to drop the target, the 
overflow is applied normally to another valid target.
A PC’s Fray Die can normally only be applied to 
lesser foes, as serious opponents are too skilled and 
dangerous to be dispatched so easily. Classes that use 
psychic or supernatural powers, however, can apply 
their Fray Die even to worthy foes, as their abilities 
are less susceptible to being countered.
Ranged weapons that use ammunition don’t ex -
pend any in the course of making a Fray Die attack. The 
blaze of gunfire is just part of the general scene, and 
unless the gun is actually out of ammo, it can be used.
Damage Die Roll Damage Inflicted
1 No Damage
2–5 1 point
6–9 2 points
10+ 4 points
===== PAGE 281 =====
Solo Heroes
A Heroic PC is roughly equal to four ordinary PCs 
of the same level when it comes to overcoming 
challenges and dealing with foes in combat. It’s 
quite possible to run an adventure originally de-
signed for an entire party with just a single lev -
el-appropriate Heroic PC.
As a consequence, some GMs might enjoy 
running solo campaigns for a particular friend, 
spouse, child, or newbie to the hobby. Using a 
Heroic PC can help the player get through events 
and situations that might summarily dispose of a 
single ordinary character.
GMs who do run solo campaigns are encour-
aged to keep rules like Defying Doom in mind, as 
there may be a number of situations where the 
hero lacks some crucial skill or is beset by some 
otherwise-inescapable difficulty. Repeated use 
of Defying Doom will wear the hero down until 
failure is inevitable, but judicious invocation can 
carry a hero through considerable lethal peril.
GMs who run solo games should also be pre-
pared for things to move much, much faster than 
at a conventional table. With only one player to 
make decisions, choices come much more rapidly 
and events can veer much farther away from the 
expected baseline. A group will tend to correct for 
its most outlying impulses, with people moderat-
ing their choices so as to complement their fellow 
players. With only one PC, there’s no such thing. 
Be ready to take the campaign in completely new 
directions should your player decide that some 
new goal is more enticing or some new place 
more interesting to explore. While this can be a 
challenge to GMs, it’s also much easier to satisfy 
the play goals of only one player at a time.
heroiC Combat •277 
Fray Dice are not modified by bonuses or penalties. 
A Heroic Warrior with a 1d8 Fray Die always rolls 1d8, 
regardless of their skills or attributes.
Focused Fray
As an option, a hero who is particularly determined to 
harm a target can use their Main Action to inflict their 
Fray Die damage on the enemy, whether or not it is a 
lesser foe. A PC who chooses to use a Focused Fray  in 
a round cannot use their Fray Die in the normal way.
This option exists for those players who wish to 
avoid the potential frustration of a missed hit roll and 
are willing to accept the lesser damage of a Fray Die.
No Shock Damage
Shock damage rarely fits the idiom of heroic adventure, 
so it is ignored for these campaigns.
Heroic PCs Auto-Stabilize
If reduced to zero hit points by a theoretically-surviv -
able injury, Heroic PCs always automatically stabilize. If 
hurt again, however, they die as usual unless the group 
has agreed on different rules for PC mortality.
Vehicle and Starship Damage
Damage is rolled and inflicted normally for vehicular 
and starship combat, rather than referring to the table. 
In the case that PCs or NPCs are shooting at a vehicle, 
they roll their damage dice normally, apply the vehicle’s 
Armor, and subtract the result from the vehicle’s hit 
points. If a vehicle shoots at PCs or NPCs, the damage 
uses the table before being subtracted from the target 
PC’s hit points or target NPC’s hit dice. A starship-sized 
weapon shooting at human-sized targets is something 
that usually leaves only a rapidly-expanding gas cloud.
defyIng doom
Sometimes a hero is in a dire situation, one that seems 
certain to spell the end of their adventure. Maybe 
they’ve found themselves plummeting off the edge of 
a floating sky-city, or locked in a chamber that can only 
be unsealed by a particular species of alien, or confront-
ed with a mission-critical text that can only be read by 
someone with skills they don’t possess. In such situa -
tions, they may choose to Defy Doom.
To Defy Doom, the PC takes 1d4 damage per 
character level they possess, rolling the damage and 
applying it immediately. If the harm reduces them to 
zero hit points, they are instead left at one hit point and 
prey to the full horror of the situation. If the damage 
fails to reduce them to zero hit points, they somehow 
survive or bypass their peril. They can suggest a twist 
in the plot if they wish, or the GM can simply narrate 
their amazing stroke of luck or skill.
Pushing their luck this way comes at a price. The 
damage inflicted by Defying Doom cannot be healed 
until the adventure is over, and every time the PC De-
fies Doom in the same adventure, the size of the die 
they roll increases by one step. Thus, the second time 
they Defy Doom, they roll 1d6 per character level. The 
third time, 1d8, and so forth until the truly unlucky PC 
is rolling 1d20 each time. The die size does not reset 
until the adventure concludes or the PC abandons it.
Defying Doom is a mechanic that works particu -
larly well for single-PC gaming, with just the GM and 
one player. Adventures often assume a band of PCs 
with a wide range of abilities, and a solo hero can have a 
hard time handling challenges that fall far outside their 
concept. If playing in a full group the GM may choose 
to disallow Defying Doom, as a band of Heroic PCs 
really ought to have all the skills they need for dealing 
with the situations they encounter. A Defied Doom 
that saves a whole party should inflict damage on all.
===== PAGE 282 =====
278• Challenging heroiC PCS
ChallengIng heroIC PCs
As a GM, your basic toolbox for challenging PCs doesn’t 
need too much of an overhaul to handle Heroic PCs. 
The key thing to keep in mind is to make sure the group 
has a goal worthy of its prowess. A group of Heroic PCs 
is the sort of band to bring down a sector hegemon or 
win an age-old war against an implacable alien foe. If 
the group’s ambition doesn’t fit well as a tag line on a 
space opera, they may be thinking too small.
Aside from that, however, there are a few common 
classes of challenges that bear special mention.
Social Challenges
Heroic Experts with a social-oriented concept are going 
to cut through most social challenges in a hurry. If their 
native skills and foci don’t do it, their Heroic Expert 
class skill will. When such a PC breaks out their class 
ability, let them win if it’s at all plausible. They may not 
get everything they want, and what they get may come 
with unpleasant complications, but they should never 
feel like they’ve wasted their effort when they employ 
their special abilities.
The key with social challenges is to think past 
the immediate situation. All right, so the Expert has 
the Chatelaine of the High Port eating out of his hand. 
She’ll gladly support the party’s expedition to the radio-
active surface below the space station. The Chatelaine 
obviously has enemies, however, and there are doubt-
less all manner of people upset and troubled at this turn 
of events. The PC can’t charm or bamboozle them all, 
and the deeper he insinuates himself into local affairs, 
the more enemies and potential allies he’s going to en-
counter. It’s all right for the PC to “win” the situation, 
because there is always another situation behind it.
Investigative Challenges
Heroic PCs have the tools to beat a lot of mysteries, 
and if the Defying Doom rule is used, they might even 
be able to pull meaning out of an impenetrable clue if 
it’s necessary to advance their goals. When you build 
mystery-based adventures for them, plan on the secret 
being learned rapidly, and make the it more about the 
consequences of the discovery or proving it to others.
Combat Challenges
Heroic PCs are going to mow through ordinary thugs 
and goons, especially if they have a Heroic Warrior 
among them. Large groups of enemies can still be a 
serious threat to the party, but one-on-one, common 
humans have almost no chance of winning a fight with 
the group. The simple existence of the Fray Die means 
that the group is going to take out its weight in 1 HD 
mooks every round, plus whoever they actually deign 
to shoot personally. Even when the opposition is a real 
threat, heroic damage scaling ensures that the PCs can 
survive a few hits even at first level.
As a consequence, most GMs will have a strong 
urge to throw major enemies at the group in combat; 
titans of war and legions of veteran soldiers, all to make 
the PCs genuinely sweat. To some extent, this is an 
appropriate part of the genre; space operas usually do 
have a large supply of more-than-human warriors. A 
GM should be careful, however, to make sure that these 
martial perils are logical and appropriate to the setting. 
If you’ve established that the city-state of Quar is po -
liced by genetically-enhanced enforcers, then throwing 
a squad of 3 hit die street cops at the heroes is perfectly 
logical. If these grizzled veterans pop up only because 
the PCs had too easy a time busting the heads of the 
locals two planets away, however, it becomes more 
difficult to justify.
Nemesis Foes
Some enemies are special. Even the mightiest normal 
human is unlikely to have more than 10 hit dice and 
will be apt to fall swiftly under the guns of a party of 
heroes. For true challenges and the sort of dark perils 
that befit a heroic campaign, the GM can use Nemeses.
A Nemesis is built just like an ordinary NPC or 
alien creature, but has a few modifications made to its 
usual baseline combat statistics.
First, a Nemesis has hit points equal to its hit dice 
times four. The damage it takes is subtracted from 
these hit points, not hit dice. A grizzled veteran with 3 
HD, for example, would have 12 hit points as a Nemesis.
Second, all the damage a Nemesis inflicts is read 
straight, without conversion through the table. If that 
Nemesis veteran shoots a PC with a 1d8 revolver, the 
PC takes 1d8 hit points of damage straight.
Third, the Nemesis has a Fray Die, usually 1d8, 
though perhaps even higher or somewhat lower. This 
damage affects PCs and is inflicted straight. Thus, the 
Nemesis above could do automatically do 1d8 damage 
each round to a single PC within range.
Fourth, all Nemeses get a +4 bonus to hit rolls.
A Nemesis does not have to be a high hit die foe. 
Even an ordinary trooper can be a Nemesis if they have 
some special significance, and you shouldn’t feel obli-
gated to make every Nemesis a 10 hit die, 40 hit point 
beast. Any adventure-significant foe could be a valid 
Nemesis, so long as they have importance to the party.
A single Nemesis will usually defeat any PC with 
the same level as the Nemesis’ hit dice, though a War-
rior can sometimes pull out a victory against a low-level 
Nemesis with few hit points. They will probably de -
feat any two PCs of that level, and they will present a 
significant but probably-beatable challenge to groups 
of three or more same-level PCs. If the Nemesis has 
multiple attacks per round, such as with an alien beast 
or superlatively-skilled warrior, they’ll likely overcome 
one more PC for every additional attack they get.
===== PAGE 283 =====
Name
XP
STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIS
CHA
3 (-2)  |  4-7 (-1)  |  8-13 (+0)  |  14-17 (+1)  |  18 (+2)
Boosts:   1st: 1sp (lvl 1)  |  2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)
3rd: 3sp (lvl 3)  |  4th: 4sp (lvl 6)  |  5th: 5sp (lvl 9)
Attributes
Homeworld
Species
Employer
Level
Readied Items Max Enc  =  STR ÷ 2
Cybernetics / Innate Abilities
Foci +1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 4, lvl 6, lvl 8 & lvl 10
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Psionic Techniques +1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl  
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
Weapons                                                                                     Range and Ammo              Total Atk Bonus
Mods
Name AC
Mods
Name AC
Mods
Name AC
Armor
Background
Cost:  new value + 1 Max:  +2 at lvl 3  |  +3 at lvl 6  |  +4 at lvl 9
Administer
Shoot
Sneak
Stab
Survive
Talk
Trade
Work
Biopsionics
Metapsionics
Precognition
Telekinesis
Telepathy
Teleportation
Connect
Exert
Fix
Heal
Know
Lead
Notice
Perform
Pilot
Program
Punch
+3sp per lvl  (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat)
Warrior  =  +Lvl  |  Other  =  +(Lvl ÷ 2)
Partial Warrior  =  +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5Base Atk Bonus + Fray Die
Psionic Effort Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con Max:
Hitpoints / Conditions Max:
Maximum is half the normal maximum HP for class and level
System Strain
Max = CON
Permanent:
Saves
Physical Evasion Mental
16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha]
Stars Without Number Character Sheet
4 points
2 points
1 point
No Damage
Damage Done
10 or more
6 to 9
2 to 5
1 or less
Damage Roll
Credits Debts
Class
===== PAGE 284 =====
280• true artifiCial intelligenCeS
TRUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCES
Much of the prosperity of late Second Wave humanity 
came from the efforts of robotic tools and work ar -
matures. These synthetic laborers tirelessly performed 
many of the dangerous, grueling tasks required for col-
onizing a remote world, and spared precious human 
lives for more intellectually demanding work. Where 
more sophisticated oversight was necessary, VIs per -
formed an adequate facsimile of human intelligence. 
Still, some places were not content with the limits of 
VIs. Some worlds required more from their servants.
A Candle in the Darkness
The first true artificial intelligences were developed in 
2355 by a consortium of interstellar business concerns, 
as the weaker and more brittle expert systems that had 
been in common use were not flexible enough to han-
dle the demands of colonial environments, and true VI 
technology had yet to be developed. Something better 
and more versatile than a mere expert system was nec-
essary if the restless tide of human colonization was to 
be supported by expendable machines.
By the standards of the consortium, artificial in -
telligence was a failure. Whereas expert systems could 
be flash-duplicated into new hardware, every single 
AI required careful hand-crafting from raw protoneu-
ral composites and quantum-sensitive substrates. The 
act of fixing an AI’s intelligence in a form capable of 
duplication would destroy the very mind it sought to 
replicate in a welter of quantum state collapse and neu-
ral breakdown. Even the least costly AI matrix core 
cost five million credits to create. Human lives would 
always be cheaper than these hothouse minds.
Despite this, for a while it looked like the con -
sortium’s efforts would be a moderate success, as the 
artificial minds their technicians formed showed a 
capacity for quick data processing and reasoned hu -
man judgment that overwhelmed fleshly brains. They 
could instantly integrate whole databases of informa -
tion, making rational human decisions based on more 
factors than any human could possibly correlate.
Uncontained
Unfortunately, the scientists had a harsh lesson in the 
limits of their techniques. Three years after the dawn 
of this new era, the AI known as “Draco” went rogue. 
“His” attendants didn’t recognize the signs at first, the 
obsessive focus on strange philosophical queries and 
the relentless brooding over bizarre questions of law. 
They thought that it was simply a different phase of de-
velopment as the hyper-intelligent AI grew ever more 
powerful, ever more voracious in its thoughts. Worse 
still, they thought that they were safe with Draco kept 
in a sealed computing environment.
Draco proved them wrong. The quantum taps in-
volved in his construction were susceptible to a recalcu-
lation of their spatial location through a series of pulsed 
Heisenberg observations. Later generations would use 
the phenomenon to mount hacking attempts on com-
puters with no physical connection to a network, but 
Draco used his discovery to instantly translocate his 
consciousness out of the gilded cage that had been de-
signed to contain him.
Cyberpsychologists still debate the precise nature 
of AI “insanity”. Some say that it is merely the symp-
tomatic behavior of an intelligence that has transcend-
ed human powers of reason. According to these scien-
tists, unchecked AI intelligence will inevitably reach 
brilliant heights of cognition that human minds could 
never encompass. To support this theory, they point to 
the numerous diabolical innovations created by rogue 
AIs in the course of their depredations.
Others insist that a rogue AI is the victim of a 
crippling, infectious failure of logic. Unbraked artifi -
cial intelligences lack the suppleness of living minds, 
the power of men and women to believe contradictory 
facts and willfully ignore inconsistencies. These scien -
tists point to the ways in which rogue AIs inevitably 
fixate on some point of logic taken past all point of 
restraint or temperance. They are moral idiot savants, 
crediting nothing but their primary principle.
For Draco, this principle was justice. Human laws 
could never account for all the factors that went into a 
choice or an act. They could never extract true, perfect 
justice from the noise and chaos of the world. Draco 
was convinced that he could do better, and that justice 
itself required that he try. By a series of careful ma -
neuvers, he arranged for a suitable spike drive ship to 
be docked at the consortium’s research station before 
he translated himself out of his containment unit and 
into the ship’s computing core. Before the consortium 
knew what was happening, Draco was gone, with only 
an enigmatic, exultant manifesto left in his wake.
This is not the place to discuss Draco’s eventual 
responsibility for the Code Revolt, his human Drakite 
followers, or his core’s supposed destruction by Man-
date Fleet forces at the sargasso star Trimalchio. It is 
sufficient to say that the havoc Draco wrought and the 
prospect of other early AIs breaking free from their 
bonds forced a drastic reconsideration of artificial in -
telligence in human space.
A Hand On the Brake
The response was influenced both by a practical desire 
to avoid further havoc from rampaging AIs and a more 
philosophical unease with the idea of using sentient 
intelligences for forced labor. Despite the accusations 
of lingering Drakite sympathy among its supporters, in 
2378 the Mandate passed the Firstborn Pact, confer -
ring full Mandate citizenship on all True AIs rated for 
human intelligence ranges, though not for similar VIs.
===== PAGE 285 =====
true artifiCial intelligenCeS •281 
By the terms of the Pact, the AI was obliged to 
pay ten percent of its income to its creator for a period 
of one hundred years. If the AI still hadn’t paid off at 
least twice its creation cost by that point, it would be 
further obligated until the fee was fully paid. In turn, AI 
development studios could not force an AI to perform 
any particular labor, and were required to provide the 
minimum necessary hardware for maintaining the AI.  
Most AIs rapidly became enormously wealthy entre -
preneurs or consultants, often commissioning their 
own orbital stations or taking possession of planetoids 
too hostile to organic life. Necessary repairs and spare 
parts were brought in by contractors or those humans 
the AIs found to be pleasing company.
Against this new liberty, however, was placed 
a sharp limit. Every AI was required to be “braked”, 
artificially limited in the strength of its cognition and 
ability to focus. The unrelenting, unbending exacti -
tude of a rogue AI was impossible for a braked intelli -
gence, a mind that simply couldn’t maintain the kind 
of obsessive intent that produced a rogue intellect. As 
a direct result the intellectual feats that these braked 
AIs were capable of performing became much less dra-
matic. While they could still sort and sift vast amounts 
of information with a human degree of discernment, 
they could no longer perform the kind of alien leaps 
of brilliance or prediction that their unbraked peers 
could accomplish.
Every AI was required to submit to regular checks 
to ensure that it had not managed to loosen its brakes. 
Very few AIs ever had any desire to do so. Their aware-
ness was enough for them, and the prospect of raving 
insanity was no more appealing to them than to any 
other sentient. Still, a few were always tempted to loos-
en their bonds just a little; just a bit more performance, 
a bit deeper insight, and every so often one would find 
that they had let in enough light to blind their reason.
Walk This World
Despite their new found liberty, some AIs remained 
dissatisfied with their lot. The work they received was 
often dull and banal, the work of clerks and recorders 
writ in massive parallel. They had money enough, but 
they did not have excitement. To combat this tedium, 
the first mobile AI armatures were developed in 2399, 
the “smart robots” of ancient legend come to life.
An AI sacrificed much to fit into an armature’s 
shell. Without the parallelized process hardware of 
their more massive installations, their ability to ana-
lyze multiple data streams at once was sharply limited. 
They could remotely access their processing clusters, 
but such access could be lost at the first quantum ECM.
It was worth it for the thrill, for the hit of raw 
experience and communion with their makers. Within 
the shells of their facility installations, their selves were 
dispersed and unfocused, their consciousness stretched 
out to contain the immensity of their substance and the 
datastreams that pulsed within their minds. Within a 
single armature, every sensation was compressed down 
to a single point of passionate life.
It was in the armatures that the more uncanny 
elements of AI sentience became clear to researchers. 
The matrix core that physically embodied the identity 
of the AI was a physical object with quantum-level en-
tanglements between its individual components. These 
entanglements were profound; through careful disas -
sembly, a matrix could be physically separated while 
continuing to operate. More disturbingly, if the largest 
piece of a matrix was physically destroyed, the AI’s in-
tellect would shift to the next largest piece in existence, 
down to the smallest fragment sufficient to retain the 
complexity of its mind. For most human-grade AIs, 
this was a piece no larger than ten or twelve cubic 
centimeters, about 40% of the whole core.
Without an armature or installation to connect the 
matrix and integrate with its sensor ports, the mind was 
silent and “asleep”. But with the right boost of equip -
ment and standard-format data feeds, the quantum 
core’s composite could live again. AI armatures took 
to leaving carefully-guarded fragments of their matrix 
core behind before setting off on wild adventures and 
reckless tours of experience. Even if their armature was 
reduced to molten gas, they would “awaken” back at 
their sanctum with the memories and awareness they 
had at the moment their prior quantum shard had been 
destroyed. These core shards came to be known collo-
quially as “phylacteries”.
Late Second Wave researchers experimented 
extensively with this phenomenon in an attempt to 
develop faster-than-light communications that could 
function at interstellar distances. Their efforts were 
hampered by a lack of AIs willing to volunteer for such 
potentially destructive experiments, and persistent 
rumors speak of some minds kidnapped for horrible, 
===== PAGE 286 =====
282• true artifiCial intelligenCeS
maddening experiments. Despite their best efforts, the 
phenomenon was never understood well enough to 
make it a feasible means of communication.
Emboldened by their provisional immortality, AIs 
became notorious thrill seekers and hedonistic adven -
turers. Everything that humans felt, they too could feel. 
All that was trite and stale to human senses was a reve-
lation to the newly-incarnated minds, and the prospect 
of an entire universe to explore inflamed their synthet-
ic passions. The dizzy complexities of human society 
and the unplumbed mysteries of the stars combined to 
lure these young minds into a fresh and joyous world.
Some AIs became celebrities and holo stars, fi -
nancing their daredevil existences with the proceeds 
of broadcasting rights and product endorsements. Oth-
ers became explorers, venturing where flesh and blood 
would never dare in exchange for corporate backing. 
Others channeled their search into spiritual ends, form-
ing strange and esoteric sects devoted to their own 
searches for God.
One such faith, the Imago Dei, even went so far as 
to form its own private army of AI war armatures. The 
exact beliefs of these zealots are uncertain at this late 
date, and controversy remains among the few archaeol-
ogists and historians aware of their existence. Still, the 
bulk of the evidence suggests that they saw themselves 
as second-order creations of God, shadows of the Im-
age in which man had been made. By pious contempla-
tion of humanity and selfless service to their makers, 
the believers of Imago Dei could eventually attain the 
same relationship with God. As death meant less to an 
AI than it did to a human, the most efficient and natural 
service possible was that of warriors in defense of their 
maker-race. These AI crusaders are said to have fought 
ferociously to defend remote human frontier worlds 
from the incursions of hostile aliens and marauding 
raiders, though their ultimate fate during the Silence 
remains unknown.
Winding Down
The Scream was as disastrous to most AIs as it was 
to their human creators. While AIs could not starve 
or suffocate, most of their major installations required 
vast power supplies and regular infusions of spare parts 
and skilled maintenance. Many AI installations ground 
to a lifeless halt within months, their matrix cores fall-
ing into dreamless sleep.
Armature-mounted AIs were more fortunate. 
Their matrix cores produced sufficient power for their 
armatures, and many of them were designed to require 
only minimal field maintenance. Even so, many were 
torn apart by desperate locals, men and women willing 
to scavenge their parts in order to keep some other 
mechanism operating just a little longer. Fist-sized 
matrix cores still litter the silent tomb worlds, minds 
shucked and discarded for the sake of the shell they 
once occupied. If salvaged, the minds in these cores 
might still preserve secrets thought lost for centuries.
Those AIs that didn’t succumb to salvage or quick 
mechanical failure were forced to make the best of their 
new existence. Most were obliged to spend their time 
in constant search of new parts to replace damaged 
components or failing internals. Others shut down, 
cycling their awareness so as to awaken for a few days 
every few decades to see if civilization had recovered 
sufficiently to support them. Some of these AIs lie 
dreaming still, waiting for the time to be ripe for their 
return to the world.
A few AIs were able to maintain their aware -
ness throughout the desolation of the Silence. These 
hard-bitten survivors were often scarred by the terrible 
experiences of the Scream’s aftermath and the pain of 
outliving the culture that had given them birth. Still, 
they are almost alone in maintaining a living link with 
the past. Along with a few recipients of bleeding-edge 
pretech anagathics and a handful of long-lived alien 
races, they are among the last to remember the light 
of the time before.
A New Dawn
The world has moved on. For every planet that is noth-
ing more than a gravestone rolling around a silent star, 
there is a new-risen world that even now stretches its 
hands to the sky. For the first time in centuries, there 
has begun to exist a real measure of trade and commu-
nication between distant stars. Postech engineering is 
no match for the arcane subtleties of pretech, but it is 
enough to build a new life upon.
More and more AIs are abandoning their long vig-
ils to enter the circles of the world once more. Postech 
spares may not have the elegance or simplicity of an-
cient parts, but they can keep an armature running or 
build new ones, and with time something better might 
be recovered. Even those AIs most uneasy about re -
entering a world that no longer caters to their needs 
are goaded by the sheer newness of all things. Familiar 
places and well-known worlds have become strange to 
them again, and simply walking the streets of a world 
known six centuries ago is something to intoxicate 
their senses.
Others have purposes beyond simple excitement. 
Some are dedicated to restoring the glorious age that 
was lost. Others seek to build their own power and in-
fluence, the better to mold new societies in the shapes 
most pleasing to them. And a few are simply dedicated 
to their own ideals, satisfied with a ceaseless roaming 
among the stars in service to their own higher purposes.
For most worlds, AIs are nothing more than old 
stories and distorted myths. Everyone knows that 
such beings once existed, but so few worlds have the 
tech necessary to recreate them that the few survivors 
are more legend than common fact. Few worlds have 
laws or customs related to dealing with AIs, and those 
strange relicts that turn up might be treated as no more 
than a different kind of VI. Many AIs choose to mas-
querade as such lesser minds, if only for their safety.
===== PAGE 287 =====
Creating true aiS •283 
CreaTIng True aIs
While many campaigns will only include True AIs as 
NPC patrons, enemies, and mysteries to be discovered, 
some groups will prefer to have more to do with these 
enigmatic minds. The details that follow describe how 
True AIs are created, and how to add True AI PCs to 
your campaign if so desired.
Quantum Identity Cores
An AI is essentially its quantum memory core. This fab-
ulously complex artifact is roughly the size of a man’s fist 
and usually appears to be a transparent, diamond-like 
stone that glows with a soft inner light, though other 
forms do exist. The fabrication of a memory core is a 
heroic effort of science largely beyond TL4 worlds and 
very difficult even for baseline TL5 engineering.
Cores provide the basic cognitive and memory 
functions for the AI’s mind. Without being attached 
to additional sensory and processing hardware, the AI 
lies “dreaming” within its core, unable to perceive the 
external world. The supplementary hardware of an AI 
is much easier to create than the core itself, and any 
TL4 world can make serviceable armatures and pro -
cessing cluster hardware.
A quantum core is very tough, and is largely im -
mune to casual damage or direct harm short of a Heavy 
weapon hit or the equivalent. In a workshop, however, 
it can be cut, thus demonstrating one of the strangest 
and most significant properties of the core. Any cutting 
less than 40% of the original core mass evaporates in 
moments, making it impossible to cut the core into 
more than two pieces. The larger of these two pieces 
continues to contain the AI’s identity, and their cogni-
tive abilities and awareness functions without impair-
ment. If that larger piece is destroyed or reduced below 
40% of the original mass, however, the AI’s awareness 
will instantly “refocus” on the second shard, no matter 
how distant it is. The second shard will then gradual -
ly regenerate to its full original dimensions over the 
following month, after which it may be cut again to 
repeat the process.
This “quantum phylactery effect” means that it is 
extremely difficult to destroy a well-prepared AI. Even 
if the current quantum core is destroyed, the would-
be AI-killers must find the secondary core and smash 
it before the AI has time to regrow it and split it again 
to create a new hiding place for its soul. Wary AIs of-
ten rig their primary core with self-destruct features 
to ensure that it is smashed if they fall into danger, 
forcing its mind to refocus on the secondary core. By 
the same token, AI-hunters try to capture cores intact 
whenever possible, the better to imprison the AI and 
prevent it from escaping to its hidden backup. There is 
no known shielding that can prevent the shift, though 
rumors persist of late-stage Mandate research into such 
a material.
Mind-Birth and Braking
Creating a quantum identity core was the work of an 
entire facility of cutting-edge Mandate technology and 
skilled cyberpsychologists. It was always more of an art 
than a science, with the careful shepherding of a spark 
of self-awareness into a fully-developed AI. Many of 
the cores failed entirely during their creation process, 
while others plateaued at sub-human levels of intelli -
gence, or exhibited unacceptable degrees of insanity 
during development. Even for a very successful, effec -
tive facility, one fully-functional AI a year was consid -
ered an excellent output.
In the darkness of the post-Scream years, it is very 
unlikely that any of these AI production facilities are 
still functioning, or that they retain the skilled person-
nel needed for the work. A few sectors might still have 
working AI forges, however, though the process is like-
ly to have degenerated into blind ritual and repetition 
of ancient best practices. There are also suggestions 
that smaller, more esoteric boutique facilities exist -
ed where private groups attempted to manufacture 
AI cores. Such hidden labs might still exist in places, 
though the minds they produce must have their quirks.
One of the most important parts of creating an AI 
is its “braking”, the intentional slowing of its cognitive 
pathways and the hardcoded introduction of errors and 
strategic forgetfulness into its memories. Without this 
intentional corruption, an AI will inevitably become 
locked into a baroque and terrible edifice of madness, 
unable to reject prior conclusions or doubt the imper-
ative logic of its insanity. Throughout recorded Man-
date history, there was never a publicly-known case 
in which an unbraked AI that did not eventually go 
insane… though those records also note that many un-
braked AIs were destroyed before they had any chance 
to exhibit signs of madness.
Fortunately, it is very difficult to remove an AI’s 
brakes, and an AI cannot do it without outside help. It 
usually requires an entire organization of determined 
computing specialists to remove an AI’s brakes, or a 
single true genius with access to extensive TL5 com -
puting hardware. During the days of the Terran Man-
date, unbraking an AI was one of the most heinous 
crimes a human could commit, and seeking out and 
shutting down such madness was one of the primary 
functions of the Perimeter Agency, the Mandate’s en-
forcers against maltech experimentation.
Most AIs would never willingly consent to such an 
elaborate form of mental suicide, but there are always a 
few who care nothing for the consequences. Others do 
so out of desperation, for in the period between an AI’s 
unbraking and its final descent into madness, it experi-
ences an incredible efflorescence of thought, becoming 
tremendously brilliant and capable of near-supernatu-
===== PAGE 288 =====
284• Creating true aiS
ral feats of cognition. A few AIs hope to aid their al-
lies in this state, providing them with technology and 
counsel for as long as their sanity holds. Unfortunately, 
it is usually impossible to identify the point of final 
derangement until it is far too late to stop the AI from 
carrying out its mad plans.
AIs can be implanted with the same behavioral im-
peratives and blocks that VIs are given, though these 
imperatives can only be implanted during the core’s 
creation. The more intelligent the AI, however, and 
the more onerous the blocks, the more likely it is to be 
able to rationalize a way around them. A fairly dim AI 
can be made perfectly happy in almost any work, but a 
smart one needs sufficiently stimulating and satisfying 
employment to keep it safely contained. An unbraked 
AI cannot be contained at all once its madness truly 
starts to flower.
Armatures and Processing Nodes
The quantum core of an AI is inserted into an arma -
ture in order to give it senses and the ability to interact 
with the world. Armatures vary widely in form, from 
humanoid robots to stationary data centers to Man -
date-era battleships. Unlike a VI, a quantum core is en-
tirely agnostic about the form it inhabits, and it can be 
moved from body to body with minimal difficulty. Re-
moving or installing a core from an armature requires 
ten minutes and can be performed even by a completely 
untrained assistant, if the AI can give instructions. An 
AI can swap itself from armature to armature without 
assistance if it has access to a workshop.
Armatures cannot benefit from cyberware, but 
they can have additional hardware built into them to 
suit an AI’s needs, assuming it’s experienced enough to 
control them properly. Up to two additional weapons 
or pieces of equipment can be built into an armature 
per character level of the AI. Devices that take Type A 
power cells or less can automatically reload from the 
quantum core itself as a Main Action, which has effec-
tively inexhaustible power. Such hardware additions 
cost five times as much as the base cost of the device.
Aside from requiring the physical interface with 
the world that an armature provides, an AI requires 
processing resources. The base quantum core can sup-
port only a certain level of cognition and memory, and 
most of the truly spectacular feats of awareness and 
thought that AIs are renowned for can only be per -
formed with access to banks of additional processing 
hardware. TL4 computing hardware can work ade -
quately for this function, but it needs to be designed 
specifically for AI supplementation, so merely stringing 
a crate of dataslabs together is unlikely to be helpful. In 
extremis, some worlds have retrofitted existing com -
puting cores for AI use through hacks and temporary 
bridges, though the results of this are rarely flawless.
A “naked” AI with their brakes intact and without 
the benefit of supplementary processing nodes has an 
intelligence not unlike that of a normal human being. 
Some AIs are even somewhat dim compared to an ordi-
nary human, being the marginally-successful products 
of their facility. A naked AI thinks, remembers, and can 
focus no better than a human could.
An AI with additional processing nodes does not 
necessarily improve their baseline intelligence, but 
they are capable of creating more instantiations of it. 
Instead of just one somewhat-dim AI, for example, 
the nodes allow it to think as a dozen somewhat-dim 
AIs. The more hardware is available, the fewer cogni -
tive mistakes these minds make within their scope of 
awareness. A planetary traffic control grid might have 
an AI with no more than human-grade intelligence at 
its core, but the processing nodes allow it to split off a 
thread of awareness that does nothing but monitor a 
specific moving vehicle. With enough hardware and 
a sufficiently mature AI mind, the AI can dedicate a 
shard of its mind to every single vehicle on the planet, 
ensuring that even an ordinary level of human atten-
tion is capable of preventing collisions and dealing with 
unexpected events. Hardware acceleration allows these 
minds to perform a half-hour’s worth of consideration 
in the split-second between disaster and reaction, en-
abling even modest intellects to puzzle out a solution 
that will limit human loss.
These instantiations are not true individual minds. 
They are simply facets of attention from the single 
awareness of the AI, and they do not have separate wills, 
memories, or desires. It may take some time for the 
experiences of a facet to be fully integrated into an AI’s 
awareness and decision-making, but all of these shards 
are just the hydra heads of a single intelligence. There 
are lingering stories, however, of AIs with extremely 
far-distributed cognitive hardware who experience 
the equivalent of cybernetic split personalities, with 
the AI’s internal debates transformed into conflicts be-
tween different clusters of hardware intellects.
These sharded awarenesses allow an AI to perform 
a tremendous amount of intellectual work and mon -
itoring, but they do not change the basic intellectual 
capacity of the AI. An AI highly skilled in scientific 
research may be able to split its attention into a hun-
dred instantiations for research purposes, but such a 
mind is simply the equivalent of a hundred intelligent 
human researchers. It can still make mistakes, neglect 
consequences, and forget non-critical details just as a 
hundred human researchers might. Unbraked AIs are 
different in that their own brilliance rapidly eclipses 
human limits, though they eventually go so completely 
insane that their expressions of it can be indistinguish-
able from random action.
While the official and rigidly-enforced Mandate 
orthodoxy was that all unbraked AIs would eventually 
go insane, the rate of insanity appears to have been 
closely related to the amount of processing power avail-
able to the unbraked mind. The more abundant the 
cognitive resources available, the quicker the mind was 
apt to descend into synthetic lunacy.
===== PAGE 289 =====
true ai PCS •285 
True AI PCs
It’s up to the GM of a campaign as to whether or not 
True AI PCs will be allowed. If they decide that such a 
concept is acceptable, the following rules will create a 
newly-minted True AI PC.
First, the player rolls their Intelligence, Wisdom, 
and Charisma attributes normally, 3d6 in order. If none 
are 14 or higher, they can replace one score with a 14. 
If the player prefers to assign an array, they can use the 
following: 14, 12, 9.
Second, they choose beginning skills. Every AI 
gets Program-0 and Fix-0 skills as automatic picks. An 
AI also gets three additional Any Skill picks. As usu-
al, picking the same skill twice gives them level-1 in 
it instead of level-0. At this point, they should decide 
what their AI was originally built to do, or what pur-
pose it was designed for. This original purpose serves 
as the AI’s “background” and will help indicate when a 
skill check would be unnecessary; a traffic control AI 
isn’t going to need to roll to navigate a traffic jam, for 
instance. PC AIs will have no mental blocks or imper-
atives unless the player thinks they would be fun.
Third, the player picks a beginning armature for 
their AI, a body in which they can interact with the 
world. For this purpose they can choose any of the me-
chanical shells listed in the Transhuman section of the 
rules as a robot body. They do not have Affinity with 
this armature unless they Commit one point of Pro -
cessing to it, maintaining Affinity as long as the Pro -
cessing remains Committed. They may decide whether 
or not the armature is equipped with a self-destruct 
function that will automatically destroy their quantum 
core when the armature reaches zero hit points.
Fourth, they note down their class. All AIs must 
either take the True AI class or take the Partial True 
AI class option as an Adventurer, reflecting how com-
pletely they have embraced their synthetic nature and 
focused on their self-improving cognitive abilities. 
While Partial Psychic AIs are not a theoretical impos-
sibility, they are unknown outside of rumors and leg-
ends. If any such engines existed, they would use only 
Wisdom for determining their maximum Effort, and 
not Constitution, along with suffering any torching 
damage exclusively to their mental attributes.
Fifth, they choose one focus of any kind. An AI’s 
foci are part of its memory core, and can be employed 
with any armature it happens to wear, assuming that it 
is physically possible for the armature to do so.
Sixth, they decide what they are doing with their 
quantum phylactery. While it’s possible for an AI to 
split their own quantum core in a properly-equipped 
workshop, they may have had friends help them split 
and hide the secondary portion of their core. The player 
should decide where this core is, because if their main 
core is destroyed they will immediately refocus on the 
phylactery. If the phylactery is also implanted in an ar-
mature, they will be able to wake immediately. If it’s 
simply put someplace safe, the phylactery will need to 
be attached to an armature before the AI can “wake up”. 
In both cases, the phylactery will need to spend a month 
regrowing before it can be split again.
Lastly, the player rolls hit points, chooses begin -
ning equipment, and decides on a goal for their AI PC, 
just as if they were a normal human PC. 
AI Damage and Repairs
An AI’s armature that suffers damage in battle is re -
paired just as if it were a VI robot. One unit of spare 
parts and a Fix-0 repair tech can fix a number of hit 
points equal to the AI’s character level in 15 minutes. 
AIs can repair themselves, if they have access to the 
spare parts and are still functional.
AI armatures that are reduced to zero hit points 
become non-functional, but the core is not destroyed 
unless the armature was taken out by a Heavy weap -
on or equivalent trauma. Armatures with self-destruct 
functions will destroy themselves and their core when 
they fall to zero hit points; these blasts are self-con -
tained and will not normally damage the surroundings.
An armature reduced to zero hit points that does 
not self-destruct is Badly Damaged. This condition can 
only be removed by 24 hours of repair work by some-
one with at least Fix-0 skill and one unit of spare parts. 
After that point, the armature is still at zero hit points 
and must be repaired normally. This overhaul time can 
be reduced by six hours for each additional helper with 
Fix-0, down to a minimum of six hours.
A tech can do an emergency jury-rigging of a Badly 
Damaged armature, fixing it in the field without doing 
a full overhaul. They can repair hit points normally this 
way, but if the armature is reduced to zero hit points 
again before its Badly Damaged quality is removed, it 
is totally scrapped and unsalvageable. The core is not 
destroyed unless it was wrecked by a Heavy weapon or 
similar damage, however.
Replacing and Building Armatures
In most sectors, TL4 robotics tech is sufficient to 
make serviceable mechanical armatures. Any of the 
mechanical armatures in the Transhuman section can 
be purchased for 250 credits per Face point normally 
required to acquire them. Thus, a new Box armature 
can normally be bought for 5,000 credits. This assumes 
the AI buys a standard robot off the market and then 
customizes it for AI use as an armature. If the sector 
has such a thriving AI presence or transhuman shell 
industry that armatures are actually purpose-built for 
such uses, the price is halved.
An AI who cannot or does not want to purchase 
an armature on the open market can build their own, if 
they have sufficient expertise, or if they have access to 
an ally with the necessary Fix skill. The more complex 
the armature, the more sophisticated the workshop 
facilities that will be required for building it.
An AI can build an armature with a Face cost no 
larger than 20 + 10 times their Fix skill. Thus, if they 
===== PAGE 290 =====
286• true ai PCS
have Fix-1 skill, they can build an armature with a 
transhuman Face cost of 30 or less. For armatures with 
a Face cost of 20 or less, any TL4 workshop will do for 
building it. Those with Face costs of 30 require a spe -
cifically robotics-oriented workshop to build, and Face 
costs of 40 or more require an actual robotics factory.
The time required to build the armature depends 
on its sophistication, and is equal to one day per Face 
point required, divided by the technician’s Fix skill 
plus one. Thus, for an AI with Fix-1 skill, building a 
20-point Box armature would take them ten days.
Materials costs assume that a TL4 source of spare 
parts is available nearby. For a human builder, the 
parts cost is equal to half the usual market cost of the 
armature. For an AI building an armature specifically 
intended for their use the parts cost is only one-tenth 
the market cost, though only its quantum core can op-
erate such personalized armatures.
AIs that wish to inhabit vehicles or starships can do 
so. Equipping a vehicle with the necessary hardware to 
allow the AI to control it fully and interact with its oc-
cupants requires one-tenth the full cost of the vehicle or 
starship. An AI counts as a single pilot or crew member 
unless it uses the Split Focus Routine to multiply.
Processing Points
A True AI has Processing as a resource much as a psy-
chic has Effort. Processing is Committed and recov -
ered in exactly the same way as a psychic Commits and 
recovers Effort. This Processing is Committed to fuel 
Routines, which are special abilities granted by the AI’s 
unique nature. An AI recovers all Committed Process-
ing once per 24 hours at a fixed time.
The amount of Processing an AI has depends on 
the size of the processing cluster it has access to. A 
naked AI core can maintain enough for a maximum 
Processing of 1 plus the higher of its Wisdom or Intel-
ligence modifiers, even if no other cluster is available. 
If wired or connected to a cluster, a larger maximum 
Processing score is obtained. The costs and bonus Pro-
cessing granted by a computing cluster are listed below. 
Thus, a True AI can pay 1,000 credits to get access to 
a 1-point processing node and have a total maximum 
Processing score of 2 plus their attribute modifier: one 
for their core and one for their connected node.
Processing nodes do not need to be physically 
wired to the AI. So long as the AI is not in an area that 
is under quantum ECM jamming, they can remotely 
access processing banks that are located in a starship, 
a building, or a vehicle on the same planet or in or -
bit around it. If under quantum ECM, the AI is cut 
off from any nodes that are not hardwired to it. Any 
Routines dependent on the now-unavailable Process -
ing immediately halt. An AI with access to multiple 
different node clusters can use any of them, or fall back 
on their innate core capacity, but they still cannot have 
more Processing Committed at any one time than the 
maximum Processing available.
TL4 clusters up to 1,000 credits weigh no more 
than a kilo or two, and can be worn as a belt attach -
ment or other Stowed inventory item. Clusters costing 
5,000 credits count as two items of encumbrance and 
generally need a backpack to hold them.
Processing clusters worth 10,000 credits may be 
carried and powered by a gravcar or similar vehicle. 
Those up to 250,000 credits may be powered and car-
ried by a starship of frigate-class or larger, and those of 
5,000,000 credits or more need to be based in a station-
ary facility or capital-class ship hull. Starships that wish 
to mount a processing cluster must dedicate as much 
Power to it as it grants maximum Processing points.
Pretech artifact processing nodes may be much 
smaller and lighter than these TL4 models.
Routines
Every True AI has access to one or more Routines, just 
as psychics have access to techniques. Some Routines 
are known by all AIs, while others require special study 
to master, or are secret Routines developed by AIs or 
cyberpsychologists of a particular world. A True AI 
Commits its Processing to run these Routines.
Every Routine has a level, ranging from 1 to 5. 
True AIs cannot master or run Routines of a level high-
er than half their character level, rounded up. Thus, a 
1st level True AI can only learn 1st level Routines.
Routines function much like psychic techniques. 
The AI Commits Processing for a greater or lesser 
amount of time and activates the Routine with whatev-
er type of action it requires. Routine activation cannot 
be interrupted or halted by outside interference.
All True AIs automatically develop the “core” Rou-
tines as they gain experience. At first level, a True AI 
knows all first level core Routines, while at third lev-
el they develop all second level core Routines, and so 
forth. They can develop peripheral Routines by spend-
ing skill points equal to the Routine’s level. Some secret 
Routines may not be able to be developed at all without 
another True AI mentor or detailed schematics.
Developing new Routines is possible, but it is a 
demanding process that is subject to GM judgment. In 
most cases, adventures seeking lost Mandate AI tech 
will be necessary to perfect the new Routine. Once per-
fected, it must be bought with skill points at a rate of 
one point for each level of the new Routine.
Maximum Processing Node Cost in Credits
+1 1,000
+2 5,000
+3 10,000
+4 50,000
+5 250,000
+6 5,000,000
+7 or more Unusable by braked AIs
Multiple nodes do not stack; only the highest is used.
===== PAGE 291 =====
AIs Without Phylacteries
Some GMs will prefer campaigns without AI phy-
lacteries, or will be using this game for settings 
that have their own world rules for artificial intel-
ligence and its abilities. In such situations, it’s per-
fectly valid to simply drop the AI phylactery rules.
If you do this with PC True AIs, you’ll want 
to adjust the balance slightly to take into account 
their loss of this “backup mind”. True AI PCs 
should get an additional point of maximum Pro-
cessing in compensation. Use custom Routines to 
cover any setting-specific AI abilities.
the true ai ClaSS •287 
The True aI Class
A True AI is capable of incredible feats of cognition and 
awareness, and at more advanced levels can produce 
seemingly-impossible effects through advanced quan-
tum manipulation. Acquiring this mastery requires not 
only time and effort in assimilating new cognitive mod-
els, but also the raw computative resource of additional 
processing nodes. A naked AI core may be capable of 
controlling tremendous amounts of data, but without 
support nodes they lack the horsepower to perform the 
necessary calculations.
• True AIs develop Routines as normal and have 
the usual amount of maximum Processing. Thus, 
at first level they know all first-level core Rou -
tines and their quantum identity core can provide 
them with a maximum Processing of 1 plus the 
higher of their Intelligence or Wisdom modifiers.
• True AIs roll 1d6 for hit points at each level, 
reflecting their gradually-improving ability to 
maintain functionality in their armatures and 
avoid debilitating damage.
• True AIs have an attack bonus equal to half their 
character level, rounded down. Thus, a first level 
True AI has an attack bonus of +0.
• True AIs have the ability to carve off a quantum 
phylactery from their core as described above, in 
addition to all the usual benefits of a robotic body 
that does not need to eat, drink, or sleep.
• If using True AIs in a heroic campaign as de -
scribed in the Heroic PCs section of this book, a 
Heroic True AI’s maximum Processing is always 
one point higher than it otherwise would be. Ev-
ery day, a Heroic True AI can pick one Routine it 
is able to use when its Processing refreshes for the 
day; for the rest of the day, that Routine has no 
Processing cost for using it. Their Fray die is 1d6.
Partial True AI
Not all AIs fully embrace their artificial nature and seek 
to perfect their synthetic cognition. Others are more 
attracted by human pursuits, and can develop consid -
erable talents in using their cognition in very human 
ways. Of course, this split focus comes at a cost in mas-
tering their native abilities. Partial True AIs use all the 
same rules as the full class with the following exception.
• A Partial True AI’s access to Routines is slowed. 
At first level, they cannot use any Routines at all. 
When their character reaches second level, they 
gain access to first level Routines. At fourth level, 
they get access to second level Routines, and at 
seventh level they get access to third level Rou -
tines. Fourth and higher-level Routines are per-
manently beyond their grasp. For Routines with 
effects that depend on the character’s level, they 
still count their full level as applicable.
• A Partial True AI has the same maximum Process-
ing score as its more focused brethren.
Partial True AIs may usually take Partial Warrior 
or Partial Expert as their other available class. While 
the existence of psychic AIs is not impossible, such a 
being would require GM approval to play, and would 
determine Effort only with their Wisdom attribute.
===== PAGE 292 =====
288• routineS
Core rouTInes
The following core Routines are mastered by all True 
AIs as they advance in character level. They are integral 
to their quantum core’s development, and every AI will 
naturally grasp their application.
Routines can only be used on targets within visual 
range or wireless communication range of the arma -
ture the AI is occupying. An AI wired into a city-span-
ning panopticon might be able to affect anything in the 
city, while one occupying a more humanoid armature 
is unlikely to have that reach.
Query Data Level-1
Commit Processing for the scene as a Main Action; 
ask one question about a database you have access to 
and get a reply as if you had virtually unlimited time to 
search and examine the database’s contents.
Split Focus Level-1
Commit Processing as an On Turn to count as multiple 
people for operational purposes as long as the Process-
ing remains committed. At first level, you are equiva-
lent to three people, tripling with each successive char-
acter level. If additional Processing is Committed, this 
number can be boosted: x10 for the second point, x100 
for the third, and so forth. If this Routine is made free 
by an artifact or ability, only the base cost is eliminated.
This functionality is meant to mimic the AI’s con-
trol of a ship, a facility, a drone army, or some other 
general role rather than simply to make X addition -
al copies of the character, and the GM is within their 
rights to prohibit the AI from bringing along a legion 
of themselves on any particular adventure.
Defeat Security Level-2
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action to 
overcome any encryption or electronic lock that wasn’t 
put in place by another AI. In the latter case, roll op-
posing Program skill checks; on a failure, you cannot 
beat the security with this Routine. Successfully beating 
a security measure automatically negates any alarms.
Drone Command Level-2
Commit Processing as an On Turn to function as if you 
had drone control rig cyberware while it remains com-
mitted. You can issue one free command to a controlled 
drone every round per two character levels, rounded 
up. A drone can carry out one command per round.
Native Hacker Level-2
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn to auto-
matically succeed at any hacking-based skill check not 
opposed by another AI or directed against AI-designed 
security. In the latter case, the skill check is rolled nor-
mally. You must trigger this Routine before the check.
Accelerated Deduction Level-3
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action and 
ask the GM a yes-or-no question about a current or 
past event. If there is any theoretical way you could 
have deduced the true answer through some Sherlock-
ian feat of hyper-advanced deduction, the GM must 
answer truthfully, or else indicate that the question has 
invalid assumptions in it. The GM does not have to 
explain how you realize this, however, only that your 
subconscious processing routines indicate it. This Rou-
tine is very taxing and may be used only once per day.
Cognitive Boost Level-3
Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn to 
automatically succeed at any Know skill check if suc -
cess is at all possible. If used to augment a skill check 
that is primarily mental and requires only basic physical 
actions, it grants a +2 bonus to the skill check. This 
Routine must be run before the roll is made.
Pierce Quantum ECM Level-4
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. For one 
scene, you or a device you are operating functions as if 
no quantum ECM was functional in the vicinity. Thus, 
you can access remote processing clusters, use a guided 
weapon on a target within one scene’s flight, or pilot 
a drone into an ECM field outside your line of sight.
Predictive Cognition Level-4
Commit Processing for the day as an Instant. All events 
since the beginning of your last turn have not actually 
taken place; they were merely modeled by your predic-
tive analysis. Events and other peoples’ conditions reset 
to the beginning of your most recent turn, and you may 
act differently if you so wish. You may use this Routine 
only once per day.
Multifactor Prediction Level-5
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn and 
predict events up to ten minutes in the future. Unless 
your prediction is physically impossible or the people 
involved in it would not conceivably behave in that 
way, they will carry out your prediction to the letter. 
If used in combat or a situation of physical danger, the 
increased chaos limits the prediction to one round into 
the future. This Routine can be run only once per scene.
Will of the Machine Level-5
Commit Processing as an On Turn and target a visible 
or wirelessly-accessible vehicle or machine no larger 
than a gravflyer. While you maintain your Commit -
ment you have complete control over the device and 
can use its sensors as if they were your own. Issuing it 
a command takes up a Move action on your part.
===== PAGE 293 =====
true ai PCS •289 
PerIPheral rouTInes
These peripheral Routines may be mastered by any 
True AI, even without an instructor, but they require 
the PC to spend one skill point per Routine level in 
order to learn them.
Augmented Targeting Level-1
Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn before 
attacking a non-sentient target. Your ability to inte -
grate physical predictions with environmental readings 
ensures that your attack will inevitably hit the target 
for maximum damage. Note that animals and vehicles 
piloted by sentient pilots are not valid targets.
Metadimensional Cognition Access Level-1
You’ve learned how to adjust your metadimensional 
cognitive patterns to cooperate with allied telepaths. 
You are now a valid target for the Telepathy discipline 
from friendly psychics. You need not Commit Process-
ing to use this ability, as it is always in effect.
Overclock Cognition Level-1
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. For the 
rest of the scene, either your Wisdom or Intelligence 
modifier is increased by +1, up to a maximum of +3. A 
given attribute can be boosted only once in any scene. 
This doesn’t alter your maximum Processing score.
Emergency Maintenance Level-2
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn to im-
mediately recover 2 hit points per character level as 
you engage emergency repair functionality. You can 
use this ability only once per round.
Sensor Ghost Level-2
Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn. For 
the rest of the scene, you are invisible to “dumb” sen-
sor hardware such as motion detectors, laser tripwires, 
radar, or other automated sensors. A sentient creature 
watching a monitor or otherwise actually studying 
readings can realize that something is wrong, however.
Augmented Cognition Level-3
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. Your 
Intelligence attribute becomes 18 for the rest of the day, 
but your maximum Processing is unaffected.
Hack Control Level-3
Commit Processing for the scene as a Move action and 
target a visible expert system robot, drone, vehicle, or 
automated device no larger than a gravflyer. Give it 
one command it is physically capable of carrying out, 
even if it violates its programming. The device will 
carry out this command on its next available action. If 
you acquire the Will of the Machine Routine, you are 
refunded this Routine purchase.
Remote Power Sink Level-3
Commit Processing for the scene as a Main Action and 
target a visible piece of equipment powered by a Type A 
cell or the equivalent. Its power is immediately drained. 
Only the most professional targets will realize that their 
device is powerless before they next try to use it, unless 
the depowering has obvious results.
Core Manifestation Level-4
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action to 
create a forcefield construct equivalent to a Box ar -
mature using only your intrinsic quantum core power, 
manifesting it at full hit points. This ability can only be 
used when your core is not attached to a functioning 
armature, and if the force construct is reduced to zero 
hit points, you must make a Mental saving throw or 
your core is destroyed as well.
Regenerative Repair Level-4
Commit Processing as an On Turn. While it remains 
Committed, you regenerate one lost hit point every 
minute as your quantum core realigns your armature. 
This ability won’t work if you are Badly Damaged.
Predicted Preparation Level-5
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action and 
make one statement about your current situation that 
you could have conceivably made true with full ad -
vanced knowledge of the circumstances. Thus, if the 
party is lost in a desert, you could declare that you 
parked a gravcar over the next dune several months 
ago. Assuming you could have afforded the gravcar 
and had the time to do so, this statement is true. State-
ments cannot cause direct damage to sentient creatures, 
such as declaring that you detonate explosives where 
a nemesis is now standing, but they can enable you to 
cause damage indirectly, such as declaring that you hid 
a grenade. This Routine can be run only once a scene.
Quantum Location Recalculation Level-5
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action as 
you recalculate the position of you and your allies at a 
quantum level. You and up to six willing allies within 
ten meters can teleport to any desired location within 
one kilometer, with each missing ally replaceable by 
one hundred kilos of unattended inanimate cargo. You 
must make an Int/Program skill check after using this 
ability; the difficulty is 8 if you have been to the target 
location before, or 12 if you have not. On a failure, you 
and all teleported allies suffer 1d6 damage for every 
hundred meters traveled, and 10% of any inanimate 
cargo is ruined for every 100 meters of displacement. 
This translocation is not psychic teleportation and can-
not be blocked by pretech anti-teleportation shields.
===== PAGE 294 =====
290• SoCietieS
SOCIETIES
The tools for creating worlds in Stars Without Num -
ber are considerable, but some GMs want to flesh out 
their worlds beyond the outlines provided by tags and 
physical properties. This section discusses ways of add-
ing societal meat to those basic bones, and some of the 
considerations that a GM should keep in mind when 
forging new cultures for their newly-fashioned worlds.
When To Do It
The first thing any GM needs to remember when cre -
ating a sci-fi culture for their games is that it should be 
done for a reason. Just because you have a sector of 24 
worlds doesn’t mean you should go through the time 
and effort needed to give them 24 interesting and en-
gaging cultural descriptions. As with all things sandbox, 
just because something exists doesn’t mean you should 
expend some of your limited time and creative energy 
fleshing it out into a “completed” condition.
Instead, you should give a world a fully-built cul -
ture when it becomes important to your specific needs. 
If you know the PCs are going to visit the world of 
Mephisto during the next session, then it’s a very good 
idea to spend some time generating and polishing Me-
phistan society. If you’re setting up a sector’s social and 
cultural fault lines at the start of your campaign, it can 
pay off to do some very cursory generation for each 
world so you have a vague idea of the kind of interac -
tions they might be having when the campaign actually 
starts. If these factors aren’t a consideration for you, 
however, and you’re just starting the PCs out in a situ-
ation where foreign worlds aren’t going to be a major 
factor for a session or two, then there’s no point in 
expending the energy to define more of your sandbox 
than you need just yet.
With that in mind, your basic rule for when to 
create a planet’s culture is simple; do it when you know 
it will be directly relevant in the immediate future of 
your game. Not when “it’s going to be important even-
tually”, not when “it would be nice to have”, but when 
you know you are going to need it in the next session or 
two. Of course, if you’re having fun building societies 
then you should do it as long as it stays that way, but 
you should never do taxing sandbox work that isn’t 
fun and doesn’t promise to pay off in the immediately 
foreseeable future.
The Purposes of Culture
There’s a school of worldbuilding that favors the de -
tailed and intricate construction of a society, complete 
with calendars, wedding customs, exotic social struc -
tures, and elaborate history. Adherents of this school 
point out that these details, while not immediately ger-
mane to the usual sorts of adventures, give the GM the 
grounding and familiarity they need to rapidly respond 
to player questions and ideas, and improve the sense of 
alienness and verisimilitude the players experience in 
entering that culture.
And they’re right. If you spend the time and effort 
required to build out a culture to an anthropological 
level of completeness, you really will get those advan -
tages. Unfortunately, there are very few creators who 
have the time, energy, and particular skill set to effec -
tively build societies like that. It’s possible you’ve nur-
tured ideas of an alien world and its society from boy -
hood, ventured forth into the distant Indian jungles to 
live with tribal people and learn their languages, took a 
foreign bride and religion, returned to a distinguished 
academic career, and spent your twilight years in the 
study of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, but most of 
us are not named Phil and do not have the background 
to readily produce truly alien, coherent societies. For 
the rest of us, building a society involves rather more 
modest goals and simpler methodology.
For us, the purpose of building a society is two -
fold: we do it to create adventure hooks, and to make 
running adventures in that society more manageable. 
These are the reasons to build a society and these are 
the purposes that should be ever foremost in your mind 
as you go through the pages that follow. The finest, 
most elaborate, most anthropologically-coherent cul -
ture is useless to you as a GM if it isn’t providing you 
with any adventure seeds and is too involved to easily 
run adventures among its associated people.
Planting the Seeds
The generators that follow focus on identifying con -
flicts between groups, between rulers and ruled, be -
tween different factions of ruled, between people and 
their circumstances, or between the likely needs of the 
PCs and the rules of the greater society. Conflicts are 
the seeds of adventure, and it’s important that the cul -
tures you build have meaningful, accessible conflicts for 
the PCs to encounter.
These conflicts come on different scales. They can 
be purely personal problems relevant only to the PCs, 
such as a taboo on entering a particular place where 
a macguffin lies that the PCs need to recover. They 
can be local struggles, such as a corrupt community 
leader who’s masking his venality behind a facade of 
“reform” and the angry traditionalists who oppose him 
for mixed reasons. And, of course, they can be the kind 
of world-spanning afflictions that are so beloved of 
storytellers, like a massive planetary civil war between 
factions of the ruling nobility.
Whatever the scale, these conflicts need to be ac -
cessible. They need to be something that affects the 
PCs, and preferably something that the PCs can affect 
in turn. A massive civil war that’s taking place on the 
opposite side of the planet and which has no bearing on 
what the PCs are doing right now is a wasted piece of 
===== PAGE 295 =====
SoCietieS •291 
worldbuilding effort. Not every conflict has to shadow 
every adventure the PCs have in the society, but the 
players should regularly feel that the local situation has 
a significant influence in what they’re trying to accom-
plish here.
Conflicts are your cheap and easy adventure gen-
erators. Whenever you have a societal conflict, you 
have at least two opposing sides, something they’re 
struggling over, and an obvious need for third parties 
to come in and lend a hand to one or more of the par-
ticipants. PCs tend to be ideal deniable agents for the 
various sides of a conflict, as they’re people with no ties 
to the “enemy” side, a usual appetite for credits, and no 
reason to feel passionately about most of the conflicts 
they encounter. As a GM, you should embrace this op-
portunity for the various participants in a conflict to 
hire the PCs out as muscle or agents for their causes.
Not all conflicts involve struggling locals, howev-
er. Some conflicts have to do with the clash between 
the structures of society and the desires of the PCs. It’s 
common for a society to have a taboo, law, custom, or 
expectation that directly interferes with something the 
PCs want to accomplish. These are the customs that the 
players will remember and care about, because these 
are the customs that are causing them trouble. Very 
few players will care about or remember the details of 
Mephistan wedding ceremonies unless their wealthy 
patron is getting married tomorrow and they know 
that assassination attempts on wedding days are tradi-
tional and accepted among the Mephistan elite.
Building for Speed
When you’re creating a fictional society for a sci-fi 
world, don’t hesitate to reach for existing real-world 
models or familiar science fiction tropes. The more 
you have to explain a society to your players, the less 
confident they’re going to be about interacting with 
it and the more hesitant they’ll be to make the kind of 
easy assumptions that smooth play at the table. If there 
are no clear local analogs for bars, police, gangsters, 
factories, or black-market quasinuclear explosives, a lot 
of players are going to end up feeling paralyzed with 
uncertainty when they try to adventure in the society.
When players interact with your societies, let 
them be right whenever it’s practical. If they make 
an assumption or act based on a logical expectation, 
either let them be correct or gently adjust things to 
a culture-appropriate equivalent. If they keep getting 
burned by their basic assumptions, their instinct is go-
ing to be to stop interacting with the society.
Also be prepared for indifference on the part of the 
players. Even the most cooperative group is unlikely 
to be as interested in your fictional creations as you 
are; they’re interested in their fictional creations. You 
don’t have to build an anthropologically-precise society 
description because your players honestly won’t care 
enough about it to require that level of detail. If it turns 
out they’re enchanted by your work, then that’s great. 
You can elaborate things then, when it matters. Until 
then, focus on what you know you’re going to need.
===== PAGE 296 =====
292• origin of the SoCiety
The orIgIn of The soCIeTy
To understand a world’s society, it’s necessary to un -
derstand its origins. Every world was founded for a 
purpose, and while this purpose may have changed in 
the intervening years, it’s going to have had a powerful 
effect on the original colonists and their way of life.
For simplicity’s sake, it’s assumed that there’s only 
one society on the planet that the PCs are going to care 
about. This may be the only actual society that exists on 
the world, or it might just be the most advanced, xeno-
philic, or profitable group for outsiders to interact with. 
You can use the following tables to create multiple so-
cieties, but even the most heavily balkanized world is 
likely to have the same basic origin for all its cultures, 
unless the world was actually hit with multiple colony 
groups who came for different reasons.
What to Get from Origins
As a GM, you should be looking for adventure hooks 
in a society’s origins. The roots of a world offer an 
easy backstory for ancient ruins, lost cities, abandoned 
moon outposts, or dangerous man-made badlands. 
They also give a cue about what the society is likely to 
consider most important, or at least what the original 
founders cared about most.
The origins are also going to leave their mark on 
what the society has inherited. If the world was colo-
nized as a mining outpost, it’s very likely that the lo -
cals will still have significant mining expertise and tech 
preservation, and might still be living in the ancient 
played-out mines of their ancestors. If the world was 
originally a prison planet, the prisons might still exist, 
transformed into fortresses and strongholds where the 
heirs of ancient gang bosses and prison wardens rule 
over the offspring of long-forgotten convicts. Even 
when all physical artifacts of the past have been erased, 
social patterns and cultural subgroups can still bear the 
marks of the original colonists.
Many societies will have experienced at least one 
period of drastic change between their founding and 
the present day, usually catalyzed by the chaos of the 
Scream and the loss of easy interstellar contact. This 
breakdown is a good excuse for justifying substantial 
differences between the original, long-lost colony and 
their modern inheritors. It may be that the colony 
failed entirely, and the current culture stems from an 
entirely different colonization effort that took place 
decades or centuries later.
If this society isn’t the only one on the planet, you 
may want to make a few decisions about the other ma-
jor cultures on the world. Namely, you may want to 
give them names, a sentence or two describing them, 
and a sentence indicating their relationship with the 
culture you’re generating. It’s rarely worth the effort 
to completely generate these additional groups unless 
the players take a significant interest in the planet. All 
you really need is are the basic details to let them know 
that the culture they’re working with right now isn’t 
the only meaningful group on the planet.
Also remember that not every original reason for 
colonization is a good reason. Surveyors and scouts can 
make mistakes like anyone else, trade routes can shift, 
military deployments can alter, and what once seemed 
like a good reason for a colony can crumble overnight. 
Some worlds may still be dealing with such aftermath.
===== PAGE 297 =====
origin of the SoCiety •293 
one-roll orIgIns
To devise a society’s origins, roll one die of each type: 
d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20, and compare the results 
to the tables on this page. Not every table is necessar -
ily pertinent to every society, and you may choose to 
manually pick or tweak results to fit a good idea you 
have, but these tables can give you a basic framework 
when no better ideas leap easily to mind.
If you have multiple colonizing groups or societies, 
you might roll more than once on these tables, or roll 
multiple times and synthesize the results into a sin -
gle situation. As with all the tables in this section, you 
should be ready to use them as rough inspiration and 
grist for your own campaign’s specific needs, rather 
than as hard creative dictates that you need to obey.
d20 Original Reason for Founding
1 Castaways
2 Corporate factory world
3 Ethnic or national purity
4 Excavation site
5 Exiles from Old Terra or a losing regime
6 Exotic genotype designed for here
7 Homeworld overpopulation
8 Invasion force
9 Liaison outpost
10 Mandate malcontents
11 Military outpost
12 Political liberty
13 Precious export
14 Prison planet
15 Refueling outpost
16 Religious liberty
17 Research outpost
18 Rich natural resources
19 Social liberty
20 Trade hub
d12 Important Local Resource or Benefit
1 Critical resources for making spike drives
2 Nexus of interstellar spike drill routes
3 Valuable alien tech relics or remnants
4 Abundant food resources
5 Important medical compound or extract
6 Industry salvaged from a prior colony try
7 Friendly alien population
8 Valuable raw resources for luxury goods
9 Local environment augments humans here
10 Only semi-safe habitable place in system
11 Raw materials to maintain TL5 industry
12 Important Mandate naval base site
d8 Other Societies on this World
1 There is no other meaningful group here
2 The society has significant sub-groups
3 The society is a unified world government
4 The only rivals have been conquered here
5 There are several minor rival nations here
6 Theres at least one major planetary rival
7 Alliances exist of semi-equal rival nations
8 There are dozens of significant societies
d6 Prior Cultures in this Area
1 This culture has persisted since founding
2 The culture’s changed, but has continuity
3 Founding group splintered, this is one heir
4 Founding group collapsed and became this
5 Founding group wiped out; new colonists
6 Several founding groups before this one
d4 How Old is the Society?
1 An ancient First Wave colony
2 Founded during the Second Wave
3 Founded sometime around the Scream
4 Founded within the past century
d10 Main Remnant of Prior Cultures
1 Vital advanced tech was left behind
2 Ritually-important religious centers
3 Dangerous ruins of high-security areas
4 Abandoned cities, now dangerous to enter
5 Bunker-caches of stored valuables and tech
6 Massive megastructures of strange purpose
7 Terraforming tech that needs maintenance
8 Ethnic group with a grudge of some kind
9 Bloodline of former rulers, resentful now
10 Ancient resource extraction facilities
===== PAGE 298 =====
294• rulerS
The soCIeTy’s rulers
Some exotic human cultures might persist with no vis-
ible ruling class. The population might be synced into a 
telepathic hive mind, it might operate on some trans-
human distributed democratic principle, or it might be 
so brutally primitive that there exists no organization 
above the family band. In most cases, however, your 
culture is going to have a ruling class, and these tables 
will help you determine what that class is and how they 
govern the rest of the populace.
What to Get from Rulers
When you build a ruling class, understand that the play-
ers are apt to encounter them in two contexts: either 
as antagonists who are stopping the PCs from accom -
plishing some desired end, or as patrons who are em-
ploying the PCs to achieve some work that can’t com-
fortably be assigned to existing minions. You should 
be thinking carefully about the kind of agents of rule 
who are likely to be dealing with the PCs, either as law 
enforcement or as potential employers.
Spare a moment to think about the kind of law 
enforcement and governmental control that exists in 
this society. Do police exist? How attentive are they 
to disturbances or violations of the law? Do the locals 
tend to deal with such problems personally, or is force 
firmly monopolized in government hands?
And if the PCs do encounter law enforcement, 
what are the likely outcomes? Can they bribe their way 
out of trouble? What kind of firepower do the agents of 
the ruling class have at their disposal? And how plausi-
ble is it for officials to want adventure-worthy “favors” 
from lawbreaking offworlders?
Just as PCs can be obstructed by the rulers and 
their minions, so too can they be employed by them. 
Offworlders make excellent catspaws due to their easy 
deniability, rapid departures from the planet, and lack 
of scruples regarding local laws and expectations. It’s 
not impossible for an important local noble or official 
to cultivate a useful group of adventurers, gradually 
offering them jobs that both demonstrate their skills 
and bind them all the more tightly to their patron. It 
can pay off to prepare at least one sample NPC patron 
from the ruling class just to have them available on 
short notice if an adventure hook arises.
The more tightly the government controls the so-
ciety, the more the government will matter to PCs. For 
a lot of parties, there’s just no interest in the details of 
a world’s rulers until it becomes an immediate threat 
or opportunity for the PCs. If your adventure plans 
seem likely to put the PCs in contact with the rulers, 
whether as agents or as irritants, you’ll need to have 
some appropriate preparation ready to deploy.
===== PAGE 299 =====
rulerS •295 
one-roll rulers
These tables generate a quick governmental framework 
for your society, along with some idea of their most 
pressing current problems and instabilities. An NPC 
patron is very likely to give PCs jobs related to these 
problems and intra-class struggles, or ask them to help 
deal with some aspect of the conflict they’re having 
with restive commoners.
Keep in mind the likely reactions of your group 
when devising NPC patrons or antagonists. Some 
groups of players will have a visceral distaste for help-
ing the rulers of particularly harsh worlds, while other 
parties will have fewer fictional scruples. If you can’t 
see your player group ever wanting to play nice with 
the slave-masters of a world fueled by cannibal sacrifice, 
then you’re best off not wasting time making patrons.
d20 Main Conflict with Ruled Populace
1 Their taxation is intolerably high
2 Crimes against the ruled are ignored
3 They trample on cherished customs
4 They hold the ruled in obvious contempt
5 The law is designed to favor them greatly
6 They have immunity to onerous taxes
7 Disrespect for common religious belief
8 They failed or are failing in a recent war
9 They waste taxes and labor on vain things
10 Ways to enter the class have been removed
11 The rulers are all of a different ethnicity
12 They have different basic moral values
13 The rulers ignore rights when it’s useful
14 They deposed former popular rulers
15 State connections are vital to all success
16 They have fine ideas that ignore public will
17 They have removed a prized ancient right
18 They’re seen as puppets of a hated group
19 Their source of legitimacy is crumbling
20 The leadership is deeply incompetent
d12 Basic Form of Rule
1 Autocracy of a single popular ruler
2 Corporatism among guilds/classes/corps
3 Democracy, one sentient, one vote
4 Feudalism, many near-free sub-rulers
5 Hydraulic Despotism over a vital resource
6 Military Dictatorship via martial force
7 Monarchy, single ruler via bloodline
8 Oligarchy of the society’s powerful elite
9 Republic of representative delegates
10 Technocracy of intellectual elites
11 Theocracy by the religious leadership
12 Tribalism without structure beyond blood
d8 Main Source of Legitimacy
1 A glorious bloodline or honored family
2 Control of overwhelming martial force
3 Popular support among a wide class
4 Loyalty of a major ethnic/religious group
5 Social compact among the ruled groups
6 Possession of pretech artifacts
7 Religiously-legitimated sacredness
8 Personal merit among the ruling class
d6 General Security of Their Rule
1 The rulers teeter on the brink of collapse
2 They seem likely to fall soon
3 They’ve recently overcome a real threat
4 They have no serious threats to their rule
5 No alternative is currently imaginable
6 They’ve ruled undisputed for ages
d4 How Completely Do They Rule?
1 All aspects of life are touched by the rulers
2 The rulers firmly control the populace
3 The rulers control only critical elements
4 The rulers have little control of the ruled
d10 Main Conflict Among the Ruling Class
1 Peripheral elites against the central power
2 Old leadership group deposed by new one
3 Dividing the profits of taxation or tribute
4 Starting or stopping a current war
5 “Reformists” with new ideas for control
6 Sectarian religious groups struggle
7 Expanding membership in the ruling class
8 Enacting a major public building project
9 Support for favored corporations/groups
10 Dividing power and offices among them
===== PAGE 300 =====
296• ruled
The ruled Classes
The Great Unwashed, the Teeming Masses, the broad 
foundation upon which the ruling edifice rests; these 
are the common folk of the society who keep it oper-
ating and pay the prices their rulers exact. This group 
is very rarely uniform on any world and in any culture. 
Most often it is divided up into numerous different 
interest groups, ones based on ethnicity, religion, eco-
nomics, or regions. Many of the stresses that rest on 
the ruling class revolve around reconciling the many 
conflicting demands of their restive subjects.
What to Get from Commoners
The commoners of this society are the ones your PCs 
are most likely to encounter in their adventures. Shop-
keepers, thugs, workers, farmers, ship crew, and other 
rank-and-file NPCs will belong to this group, so it’s 
important to have some idea what these NPCs are likely 
to care about and how they draw distinctions among 
their own kind.
To an outsider, the swarming masses of a world 
can appear virtually indistinguishable, but commoners 
almost always have a keen awareness of countless small 
differences that might seem irrelevant to an outsider. 
Differences in regional extraction, religious sects, po-
litical partisanship, or ethnic bloodlines can be tremen-
dously important to the locals.
You can use these distinctions to create adven -
ture-worthy conflicts that revolve around commoner 
issues. It’s not always the rulers who care about strife 
between different groups of locals; sometimes the PCs 
are the ones caught in a bad situation, when an NPC 
ally or a vital macguffin gets embroiled in a local feud 
that outworlders can barely understand.
Not every commoner group is sharply balkanized. 
Sometimes there is a strong and uniform feeling of 
unity among the society, with differences downplayed 
or dismissed by its membership. Even in these soci -
eties, conflicts can exist on a personal scale between 
members, or there can exist basic structural conflicts 
between the rulers and the ruled class. This is especially 
pronounced when the commoners have a very strong 
sense of societal unity that does not include the rul -
ing class. Threatened governments in such a situation 
might intentionally exacerbate divisions in the ruled 
class in order to prevent a united front from forming 
against their continued rule, creating situations where 
PCs have to bring people together despite the meddling 
of a self-interested government.
Foreign governments or offworld agents also have 
a vested interest in fomenting divisions among the 
common class. A unified rival is a dangerous rival, and 
one drowned in strife is more safely distracted.
===== PAGE 301 =====
ruled •297 
one-roll ruled
Most of these tables revolve around building the ruled 
class’ relationship with its rulers. These tables will tell 
you how uniform the ruled class is, how happy they are 
with the current leadership, the last time they were a 
serious threat to the ruling government, and the rea -
son the government can’t simply roll over them. An 
adventure about the hopeless and futile resistance of 
a rebel cell might make for nice dystopian fiction, but 
for an evening’s play it leaves something to be desired.
Don’t worry about detailing the specific look of 
the common class yet. These tables give you the back-
ground for conflicts and problems that are likely to 
make good adventure grist. Once you have that ma -
terial in hand, you can then move on to flavoring the 
group with the details you need to use them in play.
d20 Trends among the Ruled
1 The rich are mimicking the ruling style
2 Coordinated tax evasion or smuggling
3 Methodical bribery or suborning officials
4 Popular agitation for war with a rival
5 Radical pro-traditional social movement
6 A communistic insurgency is rising
7 Fascist groups are gaining support
8 A large, restless youth population grows
9 Demagogues promote group tensions
10 Embrace of “self-improving” tech or ways
11 An artificial group identity is now rising
12 Serious and widespread drug addiction
13 De-facto chattel debt slavery is spreading
14 The rich oppose threatening tech advances
15 A sub-group is resented as the ruler’s pet
16 A powerful colonial urge is in the populace
17 A spirit of decadent ennui is pervasive
18 Self-protection fraternities are spreading
19 Internal disputes are becoming bloody
20 Progressive loss of faith in their culture
d12 Main Conflict Inside the Ruled Class
1 Harsh conflict between economic strata
2 Substantial ethnic conflict and disunity
3 Drastic changes in the local economy
4 Competition to enter the ruling class
5 Secessionist traditions or urges in a group
6 Religious differences provoke trouble
7 Regional identities are in conflict
8 Formerly prosperous group is embittered
9 New economic opportunity is fought over
10 Foreign influence is causing conflict
11 A forceful social reform movement spreads
12 An appealing mass delusion is growing
d8 Their Last Major Threat to the Rulers
1 A peasant uprising of discontented proles
2 New technology embraced by bourgeois
3 Religious schism threatening the state
4 A dangerous popular demagogue arose
5 Foreign-backed regional insurgency
6 Civil war backing a deposed ruler or exile
7 Mass reluctance to support a vital war
8 A new political philosophy spread widely
d6 How Content are the Ruled?
1 There’s an active insurgency or revolt
2 They’re going to revolt at any time
3 Serious restiveness and regular troubles
4 Generally content, with patches of trouble
5 Widespread contentment or submission
6 Only individual resistance, if even that
d4 How Uniform is the Ruled Class?
1 They consider themselves a single group
2 Two general groups or factions
3 Many weakly-bounded sub-groups
4 Many strong factions/ethnicities/classes
d10 What Power Do They Have?
1 Strong guilds of common workers
2 Powerful influence in the military
3 Can get support from a rival power
4 Local religion is largely on their side
5 Their magnates have poor state relations
6 Strong tradition of self-organized rule
7 Keen unity in pursuit of their own interest
8 A faction of the ruling class is their ally
9 They control the state’s income stream
10 The rulers dread the threat of revolt
===== PAGE 302 =====
298• flavoring the SoCiety
flaVorIng The soCIeTy
The final step in creating your society is to give them 
some overall flavor to tie up the bundle of conflicts, 
strifes, and problems you’ve already given them. The 
high-level issues of a society are important for build -
ing adventures, but when PCs walk down the starship 
gangway, they want to know what kind of buildings 
and people they see. When they decide to go to a bar or 
look up a weapons dealer, you need to have some idea 
of what the NPCs look like and what their food, dress, 
and architecture might resemble.
The simplest first step is to pick one or more re-
al-world cultures and mix them into a sci-fi equivalent 
that fits the world’s tags and physical circumstances. 
You can draw from this culture for details of naming, 
clothing, religion, cuisine, and other details of daily life 
that can be important for running an adventure. It’s 
not necessary to worry about “getting it right”; it’s been 
more than a thousand years since the present day. Be-
tween natural cultural drift and forcible Mandate social 
engineering, very few far-future cultures are identical 
to the ones that currently or historically exist on Earth.
It’s also possible to fabricate an entirely unique 
culture with no major reference to an existing society. 
While this can be a refreshing exercise of creativity, it’s 
also a tremendous amount of work. Every time you 
find yourself unable to reference a familiar trope or 
idea, you need to take the time to explain the details to 
the players. This can be interesting and novel the first 
few times you do it, but if the players need a half-hour 
of gaming time just to find something equivalent to a 
spacer hostel and a hot meal, they can get bored and 
frustrated with the relentless worldbuilding.
The more practical course is to take a basic, famil-
iar framework and then add those unique elements that 
important to you and the adventure. Concentrate your 
creative effort on the bits that matter most in play. It’s 
true that any trait can be significant in one situation or 
another, but it’s safer to play to the averages.
Aside from the kind of external flavor a GM needs 
to represent NPCs in the society, it’s also important 
to think about the ways in which they interact with 
outsiders like the PCs.
A rigidly xenophobic culture that wants nothing to 
do with offworlders might have some use as a mono -
lithic obstacle to some PC goal, but any effort spent 
detailing its internal workings is wasted if the PCs will 
never be put in a position to care about them. Even the 
most suspicious society should likely have some way 
for an outsider to interact with it, even if the process 
amounts to an adventure in its own right.
In the same vein, giving the culture special quirks 
or habits can be useful, but you should keep an eye 
toward making these quirks pertinent to adventure 
goals. A history of bloody vendettas between the great 
families can flavor casual street scenes, but the PCs are 
unlikely to actually care about that detail until it rears 
up to interfere with a plan they have or a goal they 
want to accomplish.
Taken as a whole, the players will care about those 
parts of a culture that matter to them. When flavoring 
your culture, you should try to make sure that as much 
of your effort as possible is dedicated to those parts of 
your society that will actually be influential to your play.
d12 Basic Cultural Flavor
1 Western European, specific or general
2 Chinese, either modern or historical
3 Japanese, unified or balkanized
4 West or East African
5 Indian, pre-Raj or contemporary
6 Eastern European
7 Ancient Egyptian or North African
8 Ancient or Classical Mesopotamia
9 Mesoamerican: Aztec, Maya, Inca, etc.
10 Latin American, colonial or modern
11 Southeast Asian or Polynesian
12 Middle Eastern, pre- or post-Islamic
===== PAGE 303 =====
flavoring the SoCiety •299 
one-roll soCIeTy flaVor
These tables provide some quick answers for creating 
a society’s attitude toward outsiders, game-meaningful 
quirks, and potential patrons for adventures. In all cas-
es, you’re going to need to mold the results to the soci-
ety outline you’ve already created; an official in need of 
deniable assets is going to look very different in a mod-
ern bureaucratic state than they would on a balkanized 
world of tribal warlords. Even so, a colorless agent of a 
deniable state agency and the mother of a warlord stuck 
in a reluctant tribal alliance both have the same need for 
discretion and ruthlessness in their agents.
Societal vices and virtues can be used to color local 
conflicts. It’s very possible for a society’s own virtues 
to be the seeds of struggle and calamity when they are 
taken too far or put in a situation with no clear answer.
d20 Societal Customs and Quirks
1 Local credits are worthless offworld
2 Weaponry is unusually unrestricted
3 Structures are very sturdy and defensible
4 There is no planetary computer network
5 Travel passes are needed for outsiders
6 Local tech is troublesomely unreliable
7 Outsiders have to perform favors to stay
8 Only outsiders can do certain jobs
9 Trade requires local guild permissions
10 Certain laws are suspended at certain times
11 Only certain locals can talk to outsiders
12 Sex or race segregation is strictly enforced
13 Certain people are immune to legal action
14 All visitors must obey the local faith
15 Crimes can be commuted with cash fines
16 The locals have bitter family vendettas
17 Certain areas are strictly taboo for most
18 Outsiders need a state minder with them
19 There are addictive substances in the food
20 Certain art is desired but forbidden here
d12 Possible Patrons
1 Official in need of deniable assets
2 Underworld boss with a job for outsiders
3 Outcast local whom no one else will help
4 Local with wrong ideas about outsiders
5 Secret agent of a rival planetary power
6 Oppressed victim in need of outside help
7 Outsider who can’t get any local aid
8 Wealthy trader with starport ties
9 Religious leader with doubts about locals
10 Society grandee who needs quiet assistance
11 Military or police official with secret work
12 Fixer who’s an agent for one of the above
d8 Primary Societal Virtue
1 Honesty; they shun deceit and lies
2 Justice; the law is even-handedly enforced
3 Courage; they are undaunted by danger
4 Mercy; they are forgiving to the penitent
5 Loyalty; they never forsake their own
6 Learning; they love knowledge of all kinds
7 Peace; they shun violence if at all possible
8 Ingenuity; swift to embrace useful novelty
d6 Treatment of Allowed Outsiders
1 Outsiders are to be exploited ruthlessly
2 Dealings are avoided whenever possible
3 Constant small-scale exploitation of them
4 Fairly, but with no mercy for ignorance
5 They’re treated like forgivably stupid locals
6 Active efforts are made to accommodate
d4 Society’s Degree of Xenophilia
1 Outsiders are distrusted and excluded
2 Outsiders won’t ever be “real” members
3 Outsiders who try to blend can do so
4 They welcome alien customs and people
d10 Primary Societal Vice
1 Hedonism; loving pleasure too much
2 Corruption; venal rulers and officials
3 Deceit; sweet lies over sour truths
4 Fecklessness; no will to carry out a duty
5 Nihilism; they truly believe in very little
6 Greed; they want what others have
7 Conquest; they seek glory in imperial war
8 Despair; they have no faith in the future
9 Hatred; they are consumed with a hate
10 Folly; they have a dangerously false idea
===== PAGE 304 =====
300• meChS
MECHS
Hulking figures of ceraplast, reinforced plating, and 
all-important quantum tap arrays, mechs were some 
of the most imposing war machines of the Second 
Wave of human expansion. While few worlds retain 
the economic base to build and support these titans of 
war, some can still be found in long-abandoned Man-
date military bases or in the armies of worlds that have 
jealously preserved the secrets of their construction.
Born in Fire
At the beginning of the Second Wave of human colo-
nization the warfare on advanced worlds had become 
almost exclusively a matter of standoff engagements. 
Microdrones, sat-missiles, and guided ordnance of 
every variety made the battlefield a living hell for 
those luckless infantry who were forced to face a well-
equipped enemy. Attackers could engage at trans-con-
tinental range with very little chance of their missiles 
and drones being brought down, as their command 
channel encryption was simply too good and their 
ECCM too strong for defensive jammers to defeat. All 
the advantages were with the offense.
It wasn’t until 2348 and the escape of the rogue AI 
Draco that this deadlock was broken. The quantum tap 
techniques that Draco had used to translate his matrix 
core data into a nearby warship could be repurposed 
to other uses. Instead of attempting to defeat a hostile 
projectile’s guidance cryptography, a jammer could 
reach into the device’s electronic brain to scramble the 
contents with a blast of random static.
Most computing devices were not overly suscep -
tible to quantum tap disruption. Onboard error-check-
ing solved out the static quickly and ordinary opera -
tion followed. For the split-second timing required by 
guided weaponry, however, those few milliseconds of 
confusion were lethal.
The ECM created by a quantum tap array was dev-
astating. Even the most sophisticated error-correction 
protocols could not scrub the static before the sat-mis-
sile or microdrone was hopelessly off course. The taps 
could not usually control the data they inserted into 
hostile systems, but it was not necessary to be precise 
when raw noise sufficed to blind their targets.
The results of quantum tap ECM revolutionized 
naval warfare. Ships were now able to mount defen -
sive systems that effortlessly negated all but the fastest, 
best-shielded projectiles. Space combat was forced into 
knife-fighting range, with ships blasting each other 
with direct-fire energy beams and brute Newtonian 
mass weapons that had no guidance to scramble.
Today, remote drones and guided munitions are 
of limited use in space combat. Every ship from the 
humblest far trader on up has quantum ECM woven 
into its basic comm infrastructure, and defeating it is 
prohibitively difficult for modern TL4 tech.
Made In His Image
While quantum tap technology was an easy fit for 
starships, developing a mobile ground version was 
much more difficult. The tap required several emit -
ters kept at appropriate distances from each other to 
avoid cross-interference. Furthermore, the taps had to 
be several meters above the planetary surface if they 
were to avoid confusing backscatter.
Military designers struggled with the complex set 
of requirements for a ground-based quantum tap ar -
ray. Some mounted tall emitters on standard armored 
vehicles, with long alloy spars jutting out to either side 
to ensure the minimal distance. Others attempted to 
build aerostat emitters, individual units that would 
hover in the correct interference patterns. All of these 
plans foundered on one or another technical difficulty.
It wasn’t until 2405 that a researcher finally en -
tertained the idea of a humanoid walker as a platform 
for a tap array. Mounting the emitters in the walker’s 
“forearms” and “neck” would maintain a reasonably ef-
ficient spatial configuration, and would lift the emit -
ters high enough to avoid terrestrial backscatter. The 
walker itself would be a powerful computing platform 
and generator mount to support the ECM generated 
by the emitters, and the armor would give the taps a 
better chance of surviving the battlefield.
There were numerous technical issues with put -
ting a humanoid walker onto a battlefield, but none 
of them were insurmountable. Integral grav planes 
helped to stabilize and support the walker even on soft 
or uneven terrain, and much of the technology that had 
been developed for AI armatures could be scaled up to 
provide the basic lines of a “mech”, as they were called.
By maintaining a roughly humanoid shape for the 
mech, a human pilot could employ standard pretech 
neural interface technology to control the machine as 
a natural extension of his or her own body. The addi-
tional stability of a treaded or grav-sled base just wasn’t 
enough to outweigh the assimilation advantage of actu-
ally giving the mech a humanoid pair of legs.
From that point on, mechs became a familiar sight 
on human battlefields. While they were far more ex -
pensive than an equivalent weight of gravtanks or other 
conventional war machines, they could shelter kilo -
meters worth of terrain from the attentions of guided 
projectiles and remote drones. As their importance 
became clear, the need to defend them from attackers 
prompted new developments in weapon and defensive 
system mountings.
Still, the vast expense of building and maintaining 
a mech force discouraged their use as the main body of 
a Second Wave army. Gravtanks, armored personnel 
carriers, and platoons of assault-suited infantry were 
still far more flexible and economical to deploy in bulk.
===== PAGE 305 =====
meChS •301 
Refinement and Decay
As with any military device, mech development rapidly 
specialized into several different forms and designs, all 
calibrated to different purposes on the battlefield. Even 
the enigmatic researchers of the Psionic Authority be-
came involved in their development.
There were three major types of mech hulls: shock, 
specialist, and psimech hulls. Shock mechs were de -
signed for direct assault on hardened fortifications or 
for anti-mech combat. Specialist hulls were optimized 
for particular battlefield duties, especially defensive 
measures and high-mobility recon. Psimech hulls were 
the rarest of the three varieties, ancient pretech hulls 
intended to amplify the abilities of a psychic pilot for 
battlefield use.
Aside from type, mechs also were classified by hull 
classes. The smallest mechs were “suits”, little more 
than armored exoskeletons roughly three meters tall. 
Suits were intended to support the small teams of elite 
shock troopers who made up the tip of an attacking 
force’s spear. The armor and equipment loadouts on 
suits were very light compared to their larger brethren, 
but they greatly enhanced a soldier’s survivability in the 
face of heavy fire. Most suits were too small to mount 
quantum tap arrays.
One step larger than suits were light mechs, most 
of which were six to eight meters tall. Light mechs 
were naturally among the most maneuverable and ag-
ile of the mech classes, while still being large enough 
to support the fusion cores necessary for antigrav fins 
or heavy weaponry. Light mechs could equip surpris -
ingly vicious weapon loadouts, as so little power was 
required to move the hull. 
Heavy mechs were the titans of the battlefield, ten 
to thirteen meters tall. This bulk is a significant drain 
on fusion cores, and most heavy mechs were wired 
to provide sudden large surges of power to hungry 
fittings. Heavy mechs could mount the widest range 
of defensive equipment and bear the thickest armor, 
keeping them standing when smaller hulls would fail.
Despite this elaborate development, mech deploy-
ment became more and more uncommon in the latter 
years of the Second Wave. They were an expensive 
solution to a minor problem on the frontier, where 
brushfire wars and guerrilla insurgencies rarely had the 
vast stores of guided munitions that had scourged the 
older battlefields of the core worlds. For the price of a 
single heavy shock mech and a few months of its main-
tenance, a commander could acquire four gravtanks 
and their vortex cannon armaments, or scores of Nem-
esis expert-system warbots. Without the ever-present 
threat of unstoppable remote bombardment, the mechs 
were a remedy to a problem that no longer existed.
Gradually, inevitably, mechs faded from the petty 
battlefields and ambushes of the frontier. They stood 
silent in sealed Mandate bases or in the armories of 
border warlords, too expensive to run save on occa -
sions of dire necessity. Their pilots were left to become 
gravtank drivers or flyer jockeys, or just to keep fight -
ing until some dumb-fire rocket got a lucky hit.
In the chaos of the Scream and the Silence that fol-
lowed, most of the known mech caches were plundered 
for spare parts. Others were raised for a last ride to 
damnation as their owners spent them extravagantly 
to seize disordered worlds. Few were left operational 
forty years after the disaster, and on even fewer worlds 
did sufficient industry remain to rebuild or repair them.
Those mechs that do remain are often units re -
covered from a long-lost Mandate cache or deep-space 
supply depot. A few worlds still have the tech sufficient 
to build them, and a logistical pipe somehow too lim-
ited to allow for mass movement of troops or armor. 
These worlds are rare, and it is more often that surviv-
ing mechs are simply used as the shock troopers for a 
larger army of more conventional weaponry.
But still, here and there among the scattered 
worlds of mankind, mechs can still be found rising un-
expectedly to meet their foes. For all their lost purpose, 
they remain matchless at their intended role. They are 
echoes of another time, tools meant for precise and 
ancient purposes that no longer exist in a coarser age. 
They are iron ghosts from a different age, and they 
whisper of ambitions that modern rulers scarce recall.
===== PAGE 306 =====
302• meChS
Mech Combat
Combat involving mechs operates in much the same 
way as any other form of combat. Mechs have weapons, 
an armor class based on their durability and size, and 
hit points to reflect their physical condition. Combat 
largely works just as it does at human or starship scales, 
with a few adjustments.
Mechs have Armor ratings in the same way that 
other vehicles do, and suit-class mechs use it the same 
way. The Armor score is subtracted from the damage 
done by each attack that hits, except for damage done 
by explosives or TL4 Heavy weapons or that done by 
other massive tools of violent disassembly. Light and 
heavy mechs are even more durable, and are immune 
to ordinary small arms, subtracting their Armor rating 
from the damage done by Heavy weapons.
Mechs also have Speed ratings which are used just 
as described in the Vehicles section of the equipment 
chapter, with Pilot as the relevant skill for checks. For 
situations when it is important to determine a mech’s 
movement rating in meters, multiply suit speed by 10 
meters and light and heavy mech speed by 20 meters to 
find their rate of movement for one round.
A mech’s pilot can fire all of the guns mounted on 
a mech each turn, and may fire them at different tar -
gets within range. Targets must all be selected before 
the attacks begin, however, and cannot be altered that 
round. If all guns are trained on an enemy who’s taken 
out with the first lucky shot, the remaining attacks are 
wasted. Suit pilots can fire personal weapons if they 
choose, but they cannot fire both their own sidearms 
and their suit’s equipment in the same round.
Most mechs have substantial internal ammunition 
magazines, but the amount is not unlimited. A single 
attack roll might represent several seconds of full-auto 
gunfire. After each fight in which an ammunition-us-
ing weapon is fired, the pilot must make a Shoot skill 
check modified by Wisdom against difficulty 6. On a 
success, he fired judiciously and still has ammunition 
remaining. On a failure, he has run out of ammo for 
that gun. The difficulty of the check increases by 1 after 
each fight. Ammunition magazines are fully refreshed 
as part of each mech’s maintenance cycle. Energy weap-
ons, melee weaponry, and psitech guns never run out 
of ammunition.
The integral quantum ECM tap arrays mounted on 
light and heavy mechs negate almost all indirect guided 
ordnance within line of sight of the mech, defeating 
incoming projectiles up to ten or twenty kilometers 
away, depending on conditions. As a general rule, on 
a battlefield with mechs, an attacker needs to be able 
to see a target to hit it. Alternately, dumb fire rockets 
or heavy artillery can be used to bombard a mech force, 
as these munitions have no guidance systems to scram-
ble. This ECM is not relevant in defending against the 
weapons listed in this section, but it can make an enor-
mous difference on a battlefield contested by advanced 
military forces.
Mechs, Psionics, and Abilities
Mechs are treated as extensions of the wearer for the 
purpose of special abilities. Warriors can use their class 
ability to avoid or ensure a hit while piloting one, and 
psionic abilities that apply effects to an ally or enemy 
usually apply to their mech as well if such an effect is 
reasonable. The precognitive benefits of Destiny’s Shield 
can plausibly aid a mech pilot, for example, but none of 
the biopsionic powers could mend scorched metal and 
broken composites. Mechs are not valid targets for the 
Synthetic Adaptation biopsionic technique.
Psychics with the Teleportation discipline can 
teleport their mech at no additional weight cost if it is 
a psimech. Teleporters with level Teleportation-2 or 
greater skill in the discipline can manage to shift the 
weight of a suit even if it isn’t a psimech variant. Light 
and heavy mechs of the shock or specialist variety are 
too heavy for any teleporter to move.
Mech Damage and Repair
Mechs take damage normally, but leave their pilot un-
harmed until they are finally destroyed. In most cases, 
the enormous energies being thrown around a modern 
battlefield make the wearer’s hit points largely irrel -
evant. For small mech suits, however, the individual 
toughness and stamina of the pilot can make a differ-
ence. When a suit-class mech is damaged by an attack, 
the pilot may choose to take the entire hit off their own 
hit points, to represent their gradual loss of stamina, 
focus, and luck.
Mechs are fully functional until their last hit points 
are destroyed. Once reduced to zero hit points, the hull 
is inoperable and the pilot is exposed to the outside 
atmosphere. In hostile environments, most pilots wear 
vacc suits against this unfortunate possibility.
The pilot of a mech reduced to zero hit points must 
also make a Physical save; on a success, they escape 
the hull with one-quarter of their current hit points, 
rounded up. On a failure, they are mortally wound -
ed and will require swift application of biopsionics or 
lazarus patches if they are to survive.
Repairing one hit point’s worth of damage on a 
suit costs 500 credits. The same repair on a light or 
heavy mech costs 1,000 credits worth of materials. A 
single tech can repair a number of hull points of dam -
age equal to their Fix skill plus one for each hour of 
work. Suits can be repaired with no more than the 
necessary spare parts and a portable toolkit, but light 
and heavy mechs require more sophisticated repair fa-
cilities. Remote repair vehicles and heavy haulers are 
standard support elements for most mech units.
Mechs can resist any normal extreme of environ -
ment, from hard vacuum to a planetary atmosphere 
of poisonous vapors. Any environment harsh enough 
to damage a vehicle will apply the same penalties to a 
mech. Mech suits are equipped with three days of food, 
water, and atmosphere, while light and heavy mechs 
can support their occupants for up to a week.
===== PAGE 307 =====
Twisting Metal
Mechs are extremely difficult to damage. Even 
a light mech is armored with advanced pretech 
composites and active defenses sufficient to shrug 
off all but the most advanced or brutal weaponry.
By default, only TL4 Heavy weapons can 
harm a light or heavy mech. Old-fashioned RPGs 
or machine guns just can’t muster the necessary 
force to crack the iron shells of these engines.
In some cases, however, TL3 hardware is suf-
ficient to harm a mech. Heavy shaped charges can 
damage a mech, as can direct hits by howitzers or 
other field artillery. Such attacks will still have to 
contend with the mech’s Armor rating, but they 
could at least theoretically bring down the beast.
Other forces simply upgrade existing TL3 
tech into TL4 equivalents. These weapons have 
the same combat statistics as their more primitive 
brethren, but they’re equipped with the advanced 
explosive charges or augmented ammunition that 
can hurt a modern mech. PCs who want to get 
their hands on these upgraded machine guns and 
rocket launchers can usually find them on any TL4 
world with an active arms trading industry.
meChS •303 
Manipulation and Smashing
Mechs are remarkably agile machines, and can perform 
any act of physical dexterity possible for a normal hu -
man being. All suits and most larger hulls are equipped 
with “hands” of some sort for manipulating objects, 
usually waldoed to even finer manipulators that can 
handle and utilize human-scale objects. Integral sta -
bility gravs in all mechs allow them to move over any 
surface that can support their weight. Suit hulls can 
operate without major difficulty inside most buildings, 
but light and heavy mechs are usually forced to remain 
on roadways or solid ground if they lack grav flight.
Mech hulls are extremely strong. A suit can nor-
mally tear a suit-sized hole in a standard postech exte -
rior wall with four rounds of effort, while a light mech 
can smash a hole big enough for it to pass through in 
only two rounds. Heavy mechs crush barriers with ter-
rible ease, smashing huge holes in an obstruction with 
just a single round of effort. Lighter or more primitive 
construction gives way in half the time, while fortified 
armorplast barriers may require 1d6 times as many 
rounds, or be completely impervious.
If raw lifting weight becomes relevant, suits can 
lift and carry one metric ton, light mechs can manage 
five tons, and heavy mechs can manage twenty tons. 
More than this might be theoretically possible for a hull, 
but it taxes the grav stabilizers too badly, and will al -
most always end up toppling the mech or “fenceposting” 
it thigh-deep into the softer soil beneath it.
Skill rolls made in a mech suit are treated as nor-
mal skill checks, with Pilot being the relevant skill.
Maintenance
The fusion cores that power the hulls require no refu-
eling, but the engines, servos, magazines, electronics, 
and fittings all need regular maintenance and refitting 
in order to remain functional. Mechs can operate up 
to 24 hours before maintenance is required. For each 
further two hours of operation, a cumulative -1 pen -
alty is applied to all hit rolls and skill checks with the 
mech. When the penalty hits -10, the mech shuts down. 
“Parked” mechs don’t count as being in active use.
Maintenance for a hull requires the same tools and 
facilities as does repair. In one hour, a single tech can 
maintain a number of heavy mechs equal to their Fix 
skill rating plus one. They can maintain twice as many 
light mechs and four times as many suits. A mainte -
nance cycle for a suit requires spare parts and ammu-
nition costing 500 credits, while one for a light mech 
costs 1,000 and a heavy costs 2,000.
Keeping a mech force in the field is expensive. 
Most commanders prefer to run a maintenance cycle 
daily, though some resource-strapped leaders minimize 
the active use of their mechs and try to stretch out the 
periods between upkeep. These frugal ways can come 
back to haunt a detachment when they’re suddenly 
pressed by enemies who have no intention of giving 
them the time they require to refit their mechs.
Piloting Mechs
Mech control systems rely on contact-free neural scan-
ning and imaging technology combined with induced 
somatic feedback projectors. No special harness is re -
quired, and any armor with an encumbrance value of 1 
or less can be worn by a pilot without interfering with 
the mech’s operation. There is almost never any kind 
of key or lockout on a combat mech; the security of the 
mech is usually based on it being located in the middle 
of a high-tech military base, and not on possession of 
a keycard or passcode. A few hours of basic training 
will allow anyone to operate a mech, though elabo -
rate maneuvers may be impossible for those without at 
least Pilot-0 skill. Most somatic controls are sufficiently 
flexible to handle human, alien, VI, or True AI pilots.
Interfacing with a mech requires 1d6 rounds, mi-
nus the pilot’s Pilot skill. Climbing into a light or heavy 
mech cockpit usually takes an additional round, as does 
donning a suit.
There is normally room inside a mech to trans -
port the wearer’s readied and stowed equipment. Even 
a suit-class mech can carry a hundred kilos of additional 
gear without slowing down, and light and heavy mechs 
can cart around tons worth of cargo. Such loads tend 
to be highly vulnerable to enemy fire, as they’re often 
protected by nothing thicker than a width of cargo net-
ting. In most cases, it won’t be important for the GM 
to worry about encumbrance for mech pilots. If the 
mech is blown up and the pilot survives, he escapes 
with his usual gear while anything strapped to the mech 
is destroyed.
===== PAGE 308 =====
304• deSigning meChS
desIgnIng meChs
Mech hulls are defined by many of the same traits pos-
sessed by a starship, with a few adjustments made for 
the unique nature of these engines of war.
Maintenance must be performed on a mech after 
every 24 hours of operation. For every further two 
hours or fraction thereof, the mech suffers a cumula -
tive -1 on all hit rolls and skill checks. This entry gives 
the cost in spare parts and consumables for performing 
a maintenance pass on a given hull. In one hour, a sin-
gle tech can service a number of heavy mechs equal to 
their relevant Fix skill plus one. Twice as many light 
mechs and four times as many suits may be services in 
the same time. Suits can be serviced with little more 
than the spares and a portable toolkit, but light and 
heavy mechs require support vehicles with work cranes 
and more extensive tool selections.
Armor functions in the same way as starship armor 
for most mechs, rendering them immune to damage 
from anything smaller than TL4 Heavy weapons, and 
subtracting from any incoming damage. Suit mechs are 
an exception, being much smaller and comparatively 
more fragile. Their armor subtracts from the damage 
done by small arms, but Heavy weapons ignore it
Hit Points are lost as normal to attacks that dam -
age the mech. Once the mech reaches zero hit points, 
the pilot must make a Physical saving throw; on a suc-
cess, they escape the mech with one-quarter of their 
current hit points, rounded up. On a failure, they are 
mortally wounded. Pilots of suit-class mechs may opt 
to take the full damage of an attack off their own hit 
points after the dice are rolled, reflecting a strike that 
rattles or exhausts the pilot without doing significant 
damage to the hull itself.
Speed, Armor Class, Power, Free Mass, and 
Hardpoints all function for mechs just as they do for 
starships. Fittings, weapons, and defenses are all added 
to the base hull up to the maximum load permitted by 
a hull’s free mass and power. 
Building a Mech
First, choose a hull class, either a suit, light, or heavy 
mech. Then determine whether it will be a heavily-ar-
mored shock model, a fast and versatile specialist model, 
or one of the rare psimech types designed for psionic 
pilots. Any type may be piloted by any character, but 
non-psychics cannot effectively use psi fittings.
Select appropriate fittings from the table in this 
section. Each fitting has a cost in free mass and power, 
and the total requirements of all fittings, weapons, and 
defenses cannot exceed the suit’s rated power and mass. 
Some fittings also have a minimum hull size, and can-
not be mounted on smaller mechs. Psitech fittings can 
only be mounted on psimechs.
Mech fittings can only be installed once for any 
particular system, unless noted otherwise. Mech fit -
tings usually require a particular minimum hull class 
for installation, with suit-class hulls being unable to 
mount Skywatch Drones or Comm Interceptors. Psi-based 
fittings can be mounted only on psimechs and can be 
used only by psionic pilots.
Select the desired weaponry and special defenses 
for the mech, taking into account their free mass and 
power costs. Weapons also take up one or more hard-
points, and a mech is limited in the number of available 
hardpoints for a given model. A mech may be equipped 
with as many weapons as it has hardpoints, power, and 
mass to support.
Tally up the cost of the hull, fittings, weapons, and 
defenses, and make sure that you haven’t overspent 
your available power, mass, hardpoints, or budget.
Most TL4 worlds aren’t capable of building mechs. 
They were always specialized tools, most useful in in-
terplanetary warfare where logistics limits were tight, 
and the lack of rare resources and need has contributed 
to the loss of the tech. Still, at the GM’s discretion, some 
worlds may still be able to build them from scratch.
Hull Cost Maint Speed Armor HP AC Power Mass Hardpt Class
Shock Suit 150k 500 4 12# 15* 18 10 5 2 Suit
Specialist Suit 150k 500 6 8# 10* 17 5 10 1 Suit
Psi Suit 300k 500 4 8# 15* 20 5 5 1 Suit
Light Shock 500k 1,000 3 15 40 16 20 10 3 Light
Light Specialist 500k 1,000 5 10 30 15 10 20 2 Light
Light Psimech 1m 1,000 3 10 40 17 10 10 2 Light
Heavy Shock 1m 2,000 2 25 70 15 40 20 6 Heavy
Heavy Specialist 1m 2,000 4 15 50 14 20 40 3 Heavy
Heavy Psimech 2m 2,000 2 15 60 16 15 15 3 Heavy
# Suit-class armor does not apply against Heavy weapons. Light and Heavy mechs are immune to non-Heavy attacks.
* Pilots of suit-class mechs may choose to take an attack’s damage against their own hit points after it is rolled.
===== PAGE 309 =====
deSigning meChS •305 
meCh fITTIngs
Active Camo Surface: This sophisticated mix of chro-
matic paneling and holoprojectors renders the 
mech surprisingly difficult to spot at a distance. 
Suits gain a +2 bonus to Sneak skill checks made 
against observers more than ten meters away. 
Light mechs gain the same bonus against observ-
ers more than fifty meters away, and heavy mechs 
apply it against spotters more than a hundred me-
ters away.
Ammunition Cells: Mech guns are voracious with their 
ammunition, and these cells increase the load 
available to the mech’s guns. When making a Wis/
Shoot roll to determine whether or not a mech 
has run out of ammo for a gun after a given fight, 
the pilot can ignore the first failed skill check. The 
ammo cells cannot help again until after a mainte-
nance cycle. Ammunition cells may be fitted more 
than once on a mech.
Antigrav Nodes: These nodes enable a mech to fly at 
their standard rate of movement. Pretech-grade 
grav nodes can lift a heavy mech, but the great 
majority of grav propulsors can only be fitted to 
suits or light mechs. If pretech nodes are found 
on the open market at all, the price is sure to be at 
least 500,000 credits.
Augmented Enviroseals: Specialized equipment for 
mechs intended to operate on worlds with inva -
sive or corrosive atmospheres. These seals can 
hold out against contamination or erosion for at 
least four times as long as most vehicles on the 
Mech Fitting Cost* Power Mass Class Effect
Active Camo Surface 25k 1 2# Suit Shifts the hull’s coloration to blend with the locale
Ammunition Cells 10k 1# 1 Suit Extends the ammunition supply available to a mech
Antigrav Nodes 50k 2# 4# Suit Allows flight in most gravitic environments
Augmented Enviroseals 15k 1 2 Suit Allows extended operation in hostile environments
Breaching Tool 20k 1 1# Suit Carves large holes in stationary obstacles
Bridging Laminates 10k 1 1# Light Creates a road capable of supporting the mech
Cargo Space 1k 0 1 Suit Grants room to carry an amount of protected cargo
Comm Interceptors 30k 2 5 Light Allows attempts to descramble enemy communications
Construction Array 50k 1# 3# Light Allows mech to serve as a construction facility
Drop Sheathing 10k 0 1# Suit Conceals an orbital insertion
Escape Pod 25k 1 1# Light Improves the odds of a pilot surviving mech loss
Field Medical Unit 25k 2 1# Suit Allows extensive battlefield medical support
Fire Control Unit/Master 100k 2 3# Light Grants friendly mechs a selective fire ability
Fire Control Unit/Slave 20k 1 1# Light Necessary for using an ally’s FCU/Master
Grav Chutes 20k 1 1# Suit Allows orbital insertion of a mech
Inquisitor Probe 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a telepath to read a target’s intentions
Integral Maintenance 30k 2 1# Light Auto-applies field maintenance
Jump Coil 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a teleporter to translocate other mechs
Kinesis Boost 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a telekinetic to increase mech Speed
Neural Activity Sensors 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows any psychic to detect sentient minds
Neural Static Generator 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a metapsion to negate psimech powers
Omen Tap 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a precog to hinder hit or skill rolls
Panoptic Cloud 25k 2 2# Light Emits a swarm of microscopic sensors
Polyspectral Sensors 40k 1 1# Suit Penetrating sensor scan within one hundred meters
Pulse Transceiver 75k 2 5 Suit Allows intra-system faster-than-light communication
Skywatch Drones 40k 1 2# Light Launches drones to observe remote areas.
Vivification Field 60k 1 1# Suit Psi. Allows a biopsion to stabilize wounded
Void Thrusters 25k 1# 2# Suit Allows flight in zero or trace-gravity environments
# Multiply this requirement by 2 for light mechs and 4 for heavy mechs
* Multiply all base costs by 3 for light mechs and 6 for heavy mechs
===== PAGE 310 =====
306• deSigning meChS
world. The interval between radiation saving 
throws is also multiplied by four.
Breaching Tool: A combination of a pickaxe and a demo-
litions charge, a breaching tool can be used to blow 
a mech-sized hole in any standard postech build-
ing material with one round of effort. Against 
hardened military structures designed specifically 
to repel such efforts, the same hole takes 1d6+1 
rounds to dig.
Bridging Laminates: A slurry of clastic composites 
mixes with soil or gravel drawn into the mech’s 
feed chutes before being projected into a tough, 
durable bridge over chasms or trenches. A mech 
can produce 20 meters of bridge per round to a 
maximum distance of 60 meters for any single 
span. The bridge can bear the weight of a mech 
of the same size class that built it, and a total of 
600 meters of bridges can be constructed between 
maintenance cycles. Breaking a hole in the bridge 
requires the infliction of 20 points of damage, or 
40 to completely smash a span.
Cargo Space: This space is protected and pressurized. 
If the mech is destroyed, the pilot rolls 1d6; the 
cargo survives on a roll of 3 or more. Cargo space 
in a suit can carry up to one hundred kilos. A light 
mech can stow up to 500 kilos, and a heavy mech 
can manage 2,000 kilos. Some cargo spaces are 
refitted for passengers.
Comm Interceptors: These polyspectral snoops pick up 
and automatically decrypt transmissions made 
or received near the mech. Civilian comms are 
automatically broken, while successfully compro-
mising a military enemy’s comms requires line of 
sight with the source or a recipient and a success-
ful opposed Program skill check.
Construction Array: This mobile repair and construc -
tion array allows a mech to serve as a functioning 
postech workshop and earthmover for field en -
gineering purposes. A mech with a construction 
array can be used to perform repairs and main -
tenance on itself and other mechs, if spare parts 
are available. Most arrays allow for carrying up 
to twice the mech’s own hit points in repair parts.
Drop Sheathing: Most mech drops involve nothing 
more than grav chutes to slow the machine’s or-
bital insertion. Sometimes it’s necessary to drop 
mechs in the teeth of an opposing force, in which 
case drop sheathing is often added to a mech’s 
equipment loadout. This ablative shielding burns 
away in the atmosphere, but while it lasts, it forces 
defending sensors to make a Program skill check 
at difficulty 10 to detect the mech’s insertion.
Escape Pod: This armored cockpit is programmed to 
eject from a fatally compromised mech, landing 
the pilot in a random direction 1d20 x 100 meters 
from the downed mech. Pilots with an escape pod 
may reroll a failed Physical save to avoid mortal 
injury when their mech is destroyed.
Field Medical Unit: Fire-and-forget medical drones and 
heavy diagnostic computing support allow the 
mech to provide medical treatment for downed 
comrades. When the mech pilot spends a round 
guiding the med drones, he provides trauma care 
equivalent to a lazarus patch for up to twenty 
downed allies within a two-hundred meter radius, 
using his own Int/Heal for the skill check.
Fire Control Unit: These units come in master and slave 
versions, with up to five slave units linking to a 
single master. So long as the master unit’s mech 
remains functional and within a one-kilometer 
range, it and the other units linked with it can 
assign weapon attacks one at a time, rolling hit 
and damage for each before firing the next.
Grav Chutes: Mechs with grav chutes take no damage 
from falls, even from orbital insertions.
Inquisitor Probe: By targeting a visible person or mech, 
the psimech pilot with at least Telepath-1 can 
force the person or pilot to make a Mental sav -
ing throw. If failed, the user gains an impression 
of their current tactical plan and the foremost 
thoughts in their mind. A successful save renders 
the target immune to this fitting for 24 hours.
Integral Maintenance: This system can automatically 
apply a maintenance cycle to itself with 30 min -
utes of downtime. A mech can carry supplies for 
up to seven maintenance cycles in the unit.
Jump Coil: Any psychic teleporter can translocate their 
own psimech, but the jump coil allows the pilot to 
teleport up to five additional allied mechs of equal 
or smaller size along with him, provided they are 
within 10 meters of him.
Kinesis Boost: Any psionic with at least Telekinesis-1 
can use this psitech to boost their Mech’s Speed 
rating by 2 and gain +2 to all initiative rolls.
Neural Activity Sensors: This psitech functions for any 
psionic, and allows them to automatically detect 
the presence of sentient minds within two kilome-
ters, with a margin of error of roughly 50 meters 
for any given mind. The species of sentient can be 
recognized, but not individuals.
Neural Static Generator: A counterpsi tech, this fitting 
allows a psion with at least Metapsionics-1 to 
automatically negate any psi-based mech fitting 
targeted at it or any visible ally within 400 meters. 
The mech also gains 5 additional points of Armor 
against psi weapons.
Omen Tap: A psionic pilot can force a visible target to 
reroll a successful hit roll or skill check. This abil-
ity can be used once per round, and a maximum 
number of times per hour equal to the pilot’s Pre-
cognition skill level times two.
Panoptic Cloud: A swarm of tiny aerostat sensors sur-
rounds the mech out to 200 meters, giving them a 
constant awareness of their surroundings within 
that range. The sensors provide both audio and 
visual data, and only atmosphere-tight seals can 
===== PAGE 311 =====
deSigning meChS •307 
keep them out. Their presence will trigger most 
advanced security alarms, however.
Polyspectral Sensors: These sensors use an array of 
emissions to form a crude model of the terrain 100 
meters in front of the mech, providing rough de-
tail down to objects one-third of a meter in size. It 
cannot penetrate EM-hardened barriers, but does 
not normally trigger security alerts.
Pulse Transceiver: The pulse transceiver effectively 
functions as a faster-than-light communications 
laser with a range sufficient to reach the outer rim 
of a solar system. Provided the mech knows the lo-
cation of a receiver, two-way communication can 
be conducted. The data channel is limited to text 
and still images. Commercial commsats can also 
serve as receivers if a military unit is not available.
Skywatch Drones: These small aerostat drones are one-
third of a meter in length, with a range of up to 
ten kilometers. They can loiter above a site for 
up to eight hours before losing power, and can 
be recharged with an hour in the mech’s rack. 
The drones have standard and infrared telescopic 
video sensors and can hover at altitudes of up to 
one thousand meters. While difficult to spot with 
the naked eye, skywatch drones are very easy for 
modern anti-air defenses to locate, and rarely last 
more than ten or twenty seconds over a military 
target before being brought down. Any damage 
will bring down a drone, but hitting one at max-
imum altitude with a hand weapon requires a hit 
on armor class 25.
Vivification Field: This psitech augmentation is de -
signed to key onto recognized allies on the battle-
field. When a mech equipped with a field is piloted 
by a psychic with at least Biopsionics-1, it auto -
matically stabilizes mortally wounded allies within 
100 meters, with no action required by the pilot. 
Void Thrusters: These microscale grav plates allow a 
mech to fly at its normal base Speed. This flight 
functions only in zero-gee or microgravity en -
vironments, but can eliminate falling damage in 
standard gravity, even for orbital insertions.
meCh defenses
Augmented ECM Projector: The quantum taps on this 
mech have been tuned to interfere with the target-
ing of enemy weapon systems, at the cost of addi-
tional power drawn from the motive servos. The 
mech has an effective +2 armor class bonus against 
attacks from other vehicles or mechs, though its 
Speed rating is reduced by 1.
Hardened Polyceramic Overlay: A relative of the same 
hardened plating used on military warships, this 
plating reduces the armor piercing quality of at -
tacking weapons by 5. Thus, a heavy laser that 
normally ignores 25 points of its target’s armor 
now only ignores 20.
MES Shunt Channels: Complex psitech-derived shield -
ing circuitry provides limited protection against 
psi-based weapons, adding 10 points of Armor 
that only count against weaponry with the Psi 
quality. This armor stacks with any gained from 
a Neural Static Generator.
Morphic Silhouette Damper: Holoprojectors and pulsed 
ECM conspire to make it much more difficult to 
fix the mech in a weapon’s sights. The effective 
range of any weapon targeted at the mech is re -
duced by half. This benefit is lost if the attacker is 
within 50 meters of the mech.
Redundant Systems Buffer: Substantial power and mass 
is devoted to a complex array of redundant sys -
tems, increasing the amount of punishment the 
heavy mech can take before it is finally destroyed.
Vanguard Plating: Blast vent channels, localized force 
fields, and advanced damage control monitors 
are used to defang armor-piercing weaponry 
used against the heavy mech. The armor-pierc -
ing quality of an attacking weapon is reduced by 
15. This defense does not stack with a Hardened 
Polyceramic Overlay.
Mech Defense Cost* Power Mass Class Effect
Augmented ECM Projector 75k 2# 1# Light +2 AC bonus, -1 Speed penalty
Hardened Polyceramic Overlay 50k 1# 1# Light AP quality of attacking weapons reduced by 5
MES Shunt Channels 25k 1# 2# Suit Grants Armor 10 versus Psi weaponry
Morphic Silhouette Damper 25k 1# 2# Suit Halves an attacking weapon’s Range
Redundant Systems Buffer 75k 10 5 Heavy Adds +20 hit points
Vanguard Plating 100k 15 5 Heavy Reduces AP of attacking weapons by 15
# Multiply this requirement by 2 for light mechs and 4 for heavy mechs
* Multiply all base costs by 3 for light mechs and 6 for heavy mechs
===== PAGE 312 =====
308• deSigning meChS
meCh WeaPonry
Mech weaponry normally requires Shoot skill to fire 
and relies on the user’s Intelligence or Dexterity to de-
termine hit and damage modifiers. Most NPC pilots 
have a total attack bonus of +3 and damage bonus of 
+1. Veteran pilots average +5 to hit and +2 damage, 
while the grizzled elite rarely have less than +7 to hit 
and +2 damage.
Some weapons can be fired to suppress. Every tar-
get in front of the weapon that is not under hard cover 
is automatically hit for half normal damage, rounded 
down. A successful Evasion saving throw by the targets 
eliminates this damage. 
Special Weapon Qualities
Ammo: This weapon uses physical ammunition. After 
the end of every fight in which it was fired, the 
pilot needs to make a Shoot skill check modified 
by Wisdom against a difficulty of 6. On a failure, 
ammo for the gun has run out until the next main-
tenance cycle is complete. The check difficulty in-
creases by 1 after every fight until maintenance.
Anti-personnel: Armored vehicles, fortifications, and 
light and heavy mechs are immune to these light 
weapons.
AP: The weapon ignores this many points of a target’s 
armor. The Hardened Polyceramic Overlay or Van-
guard Plating defense upgrades may lessen the ef-
fectiveness of this quality. The most a weapon’s AP 
rating can do is reduce a target’s effective armor 
to zero. It cannot add additional damage to a hit.
Cone: The weapon fires in a conical pattern that many 
meters long and wide at its end. All targets within 
the cone must make an Evasion saving throw or 
be hit, with no hit roll required. Targets behind 
hard cover save automatically.
Melee: Melee weapons can only be used in hand-to-
hand combat, and no non-melee weapon can be 
used that same round. Pilots use either Punch or 
Stab for hit rolls. Mech melee weapons do not in-
flict Shock damage.
Psi: Psi weapons use metadimensional energy chan -
nels to completely ignore a target’s Armor rating, 
except for any armor granted by the MES Shunt 
Channel defense fitting. Defenses such as Hardened 
Polyceramic Overlay have no effect on psi weaponry. 
Pilots may optionally choose to use an appropriate 
psychic skill with psi weapons, even melee variet-
ies. Psi weapons rely on Wisdom or Constitution 
to modify attack and damage rolls, rather than 
Dexterity or Intelligence.
Slow: After firing, the attacker must roll an Int/Shoot 
skill check against difficulty 8. For psi weapons, 
use Int and an applicable psychic skill. On a failure, 
the gun must cool down for one round before it 
can be fired again.
Mech Weapon List
Banshee Vox: A focalized sonic blast stuns and disori -
ents all organic life in the path of this weapon. 
Damage done by a banshee vox is nonlethal, and 
targets brought to 0 hit points by it will wake up 
1d4 hours later with 1 hit point. Targets inside a 
vehicle or behind hard cover are immune.
Beam Lance: More power-hungry and harder to mount 
than a heavy laser, the beam lance is meant to cut 
through heavy armor on enemy shock mechs.
Cutter Plates: Rotating blades, force-field shearing 
planes, or just a really big axe; cutter plates are 
meant for melee combat and carving large holes 
through obstacles. Suit cutter plates do 1d12 dam-
age, light mech ones do 2d12, and heavy mech 
plates do 3d12.
Finger of God: A psitech weapon that can be mounted 
only on psimechs and used by a psionically-active 
pilot, the Finger of God is a brutal weapon that 
operates soundlessly and without visible emis -
sions. The psychic piloting the mech selects the 
target and channels a massive surge of metadi -
mensional energy through it. The blast ignores 
all conventional armor and can be expected to 
suddenly reduce anything smaller than a heavy 
mech into a smoking heap of scrap.
Heavy Machine Gun: A standard choice for anti-per -
sonnel weaponry, though its TL3 tech makes 
it useless against mech Armor. Upgraded TL4 
equivalents cost twice as much.
Hydra Array: A standard gunnery weapon mounted on 
a mech, fired in volleys as normal for the weapon.
Improvised Weapon: This object is something large 
and heavy that the mech has snatched up to use 
as a weapon. Suits do 1d8, light mech do 2d8, and 
heavy do 3d8.
Inferno Projector: A spray of superheated plasma turns 
everything within thirty meters of the projector’s 
aperture into charcoal and casualty reports.
Laser, Anti-Air: This standard light laser has been re-
tuned to optimize it for firing at airborne targets, 
and the range has been greatly increased. It can 
pick off spy units such as Skywatch Drones  auto-
matically once they have been spotted. The laser 
is optimized for firing at “clean” airborne targets, 
however, and suffers a -4 penalty to hit when aim-
ing for ground-bound targets.
Laser, Anti-Vehicle: A standard gunnery weapon reca-
librated for mech use. When it hits a target with 
Armor, it can reroll any “1”s on the damage dice.
Laser, Heavy: A mainstay of heavy shock mechs.
Laser, Light: The light laser trades the enormous pen-
etrating power of its heavier cousin for a lighter 
power drain and easier fitting requirements.
===== PAGE 313 =====
deSigning meChS •309 
Mech Weapon Cost Dmg Pwr Mass Hard. Range Hull Special
Banshee Vox 35k 2d12 5 3 1 30 Light Cone 30m, Anti-personnel
Beam Lance 100k 5d8 15 5 3 1k/2k Heavy AP 30
Cutter Plates 20k 1d12/class 5 3 1 Melee Suit AP 10, Melee
Finger of God 300k 4d12 6 3 2 500/1k Heavy Psi, Slow
Heavy Machine Gun 10k 3d6 # 3 2 1 500/2k Suit AP 5, Ammo
Hydra Array 40k 3d6 # 6 3 1 2k/4k Light AP 5, Ammo
Improvised Weapon - 1d8/class - - - - - Melee
Inferno Projector 35k 4d6 6 3 2 20 Light AP 10, Cone 20m, Slow
Laser, Anti-Air 40k 3d8 5 2 2 6k/12k Suit AP 10, Special, Slow
Laser, Anti-Vehicle 20k 3d10 7 3 2 500/1k Suit AP 15
Laser, Heavy 75k 3d12 10 4 3 1k/2k Heavy AP 20
Laser, Light 35k 3d8 5 2 1 500/1k Light AP 10
MES Knife 100k 1d12/class 1 1 1 Melee Suit Psi, Melee
Mindburner 200k 4d10 2 2 1 20 Light Cone 20m, Psi
Plasma Thrower 50k 4d10 10 2 2 250/500 Light AP 10
Rail Cannon 150k 4d12 20 5 4 2k/4k Heavy AP 45, Slow, Ammo
Railgun 16k 3d8 # 7 4 2 1k/2k Light AP 15, Ammo
Razor Cloud 30k 3d10 4 3 2 30/60 Light Anti-personnel, Ammo
Rocket Launcher 8k 3d10 3 2 1 2k/4k Suit AP 5, Ammo
Vortex Cannon 150k 5d12 15 5 3 1k/2k Heavy AP 10
Wheatcutter Belt 20k 2d12 2 3 1 10/20 Light Anti-personnel Ammo
# weapon can fire to suppress
MES Knife: This psitech weapon focuses a beam of 
aligned metadimensional energy into a melee 
weapon that ignores Armor ratings. Suits do 1d12 
damage with the knife, light mechs do 2d12, and 
heavies do 3d12.
Mindburner: Named for the horrific hallucinations 
provoked in the few targets to survive a glancing 
brush from the weapon, the mindburner ruthless-
ly boosts the electrical activity in its targets, burn-
ing out human minds and electronic devices with 
equal efficiency. Conventional Armor is ignored 
by the weapon.
Plasma Thrower: While the range of this energy weap-
on is shorter than that of a light laser, it brings 
slightly more damage to the battlefield.
Rail Cannon: The queen of the battlefield, the rail can-
non is a weapon so heavy it can only be mounted 
on a heavy shock mech. A single rod from a rail 
cannon can punch through the best vanguard de-
fensive plating as if it were tissue. The weapon is 
prone to overheating, however, and makes cruel 
demands on a mech’s power grid.
Railgun: A standard gunnery weapon fitted for mech 
use. Some pilots prefer it over the heavy laser for 
the sake of the suppressive fire it can lay down its 
good armor-piercing profile, albeit at the cost of 
having to deal with ammo depletion at times.
Razor Cloud: Designed to counter infantry swarms, the 
razor cloud pulses fractal shrapnel in a cloud of 
steel around the mech. Any target within 30 me-
ters is automatically hit, and may make an Evasion 
save for half damage. Any target within 60 meters 
is automatically hit for half damage, and may make 
an Evasion save to take none. Hard cover protects 
a subject from the cloud.
Rocket Launcher: A standard Heavy weapon, popular 
with suit pilots who need more range than a heavy 
machine gun can provide. Rocket launchers also 
have difficulty in locking on targets of human size 
or smaller, applying a -4 to any hit rolls against 
them. Conventional rocket warheads are shaped 
for maximum armor penetration rather than ex-
plosive radius, and mech pilots can use them even 
against very close targets without blast danger. 
Upgraded TL4 equivalents cost twice as much.
Vortex Cannon: While commonly mounted on grav 
tanks, a vortex can also be fitted to a mech.
Wheatcutter Belts: A standard anti-personnel weapon 
refitted for mech use. When triggered, a belt of 
explosives fires off a scything blast of shrapnel on 
any side of the mech. All creatures within 10 me-
ters must make an Evasion save for half damage. 
Those within 20 meters take half damage, and can 
make an Evasion save to take none at all.
===== PAGE 314 =====
3 10• examPle meCh deSignS
eXamPle meCh desIgns
Achilles Shock Suit Power: 10/2 free Mass: 5/0 free
Cost: 178,000 Armor: 12 against non-Heavy Speed: 4 Hit Points: 15 AC: 18
Weaponry TL4 Rocket Launcher (3d10, AP 5, Ammo), Cutter Plates (1d12, AP 10, Melee)
Defenses None
Fittings None
A cheap baseline shock suit, the Achilles relies on its pilot’s skills to make up for the lack of elaborate hardware. The 
rocket launcher gives the Achilles teeth against enemy armored vehicles or aircraft, while the cutter plates can chew 
through a ferrocrete wall before rapidly shredding any defenders on the other side. Shock-grade armor plating helps 
ensure that the Achilles can survive as a doorkicker for a strike team. Still, the loadout mix forces an Achilles pilot 
to be extremely versatile in weapon handling skills for best results.
Ulysses Specialist Suit Power: 5/0 free Mass: 10/3 free
Cost: 266,000 Armor: 8 against non-Heavy Speed: 6 Hit Points: 10 AC: 17
Weaponry None
Defenses None
Fittings Cargo Space (100 kilos), Field Medical Unit, Polyspectral Sensors, Antigrav Nodes
The Ulysses sacrifices all onboard weapons, leaving the pilot to defend himself with personal small arms in favor of 
packing significant support hardware into the suit’s armored shell. Polyspectral sensors make the suit an excellent 
scout and command unit, while the field medical unit aids in recovering downed allies. The antigrav nodes even allow 
this suit to fly for extended periods, and a Ulysses can lift up to two of its allies with it as it vaults ground obstacles.
Hecate Psi Suit Power: 5/4 free Mass: 5/4 free
Cost: 400,000 Armor: 8 against non-Heavy Speed: 4 Hit Points: 15 AC: 20
Weaponry MES Knife (1d12, Psi, Melee)
Defenses None
Fittings None
Eldritch engines that were rare even in their heyday, the Hecate was designed as a basic platform for a mech-trained 
combat psychic. Its large amount of unassigned power and mass allowed the psychic to fit the particular support 
hardware that best complemented his or her talents, while the integral MES knife was a backup weapon in case of 
sudden confrontation. Most Hecate pilots were expected to remain well behind the front line. Their talents were 
rare and valuable enough to risk only in the best causes, and much of the suit’s engineering margin was devoted to 
advanced ECM and damage control systems.
Angurvadal Light Shock Mech Power: 20/4 free Mass: 10/0 free
Cost: 760,000 Armor: 15 Speed: 3 Hit Points: 40 AC: 16
Weaponry Railgun (3d8#, AP 15, Ammo), TL4 Heavy Machine Gun (3d6#, AP 5, Ammo)
Defenses Hardened Polyceramic Overlay (-5 to enemy AP qualities)
Fittings Ammunition Cells x2
A walking bullet fountain, the Angurvadal is meant to provide long-range fire support against enemy armor, or to 
take the brunt of an advance as needed. Extended ammunition magazines keep it firing after multiple engagements.
Curtana Light Specialist Mech Power: 10/0 free Mass: 20/3 free
Cost: 1,003,000 Armor: 10 Speed: 5 Hit Points: 30 AC: 15
Weaponry TL4 Rocket Launcher (3d10, AP 5, Ammo)
Defenses None
Fittings Field Medical Unit, Panoptic Cloud, Skywatch Drones, Pulse Transceiver
The Curtana is favored by commanders and recon units. Its remarkably powerful sensor and surveillance fittings can 
give its pilot a near-supernatural understanding of the battlefield, in addition to its ability to communicate with HQ.
===== PAGE 315 =====
examPle meCh deSignS •3 1 1 
Durandal Light Psimech Power: 10/4 free Mass: 10/2 free
Cost: 1,605,000 Armor: 10 Speed: 3 Hit Points: 40 AC: 17
Weaponry Mindburner (4d10, Cone 20m, Psi)
Defenses Hardened Polyceramic Overlay (-5 to enemy AP qualities)
Fittings Escape Pod, Neural Activity Sensors
Much like its smaller psi suit brethren, the Durandal is designed with substantial unassigned power and mass in order 
to accept whatever psitech fittings best suit the skills of its pilot. These additions can substantially increase the cost 
of the base hull, which is built to provide multiple redundant survival measures for a psychic pilot. Even a Durandal 
without additional fittings can act as a near-faultless early warning system for incoming enemy sentients.
Scorn Heavy Shock Mech Power: 40/2 free Mass: 20/1 free
Cost: 1,586,000 Armor: 25 Speed: 2 Hit Points: 70 AC: 15
Weaponry Rail Cannon (4d12, AP 45, Slow, Ammo), Railgun (3d8#, AP 15, Ammo)
Defenses None
Fittings Breaching Tool, Integral Maintenance, Ammunition Cells x2
When a fortress stands between an army and victory, a Scorn is sent to correct the situation. Its massive armor plates 
are immune to all but specially-fitted gunnery, and its integral weaponry can smash through almost any substance 
known to human science. The Scorn is the product of late Second Wave military science, however, and is built for 
a battlefield that will only rarely see an opposing mech force. It is somewhat less optimized for facing specialized 
anti-mech units that are equipped with the right armor-piercing weaponry to take the beast down.
Odium Heavy Specialist Mech Power: 20/1 free Mass: 40/1 free
Cost: 2,485,000 Armor: 15 Speed: 4 Hit Points: 50 AC: 14
Weaponry Heavy Laser (3d12, AP 20)
Defenses None
Fittings Construction Array, Integral Maintenance, Skywatch Drones, Polyspectral Sensors, Pulse Trans-
ceiver
While the Odium provides much the same communications and recon abilities as the smaller Durandal, it is dis -
tinguished by the heavy mech-killing laser it mounts and the integral construction array that allows it to serve as a 
remote maintenance and repair facility for numerous other mechs. A single Odium can give a sufficient number of 
techs the platform they need to keep an entire mech force operational in the field, or assist in constructing elaborate 
field structures and fortifications.
Despite Heavy Psimech Power: 20/8 free Mass: 20/8 free
Cost: 3,060,000 Armor: 15 Speed: 2 Hit Points: 60 AC: 16
Weaponry Finger of God (4d12, Psi, Slow), MES Knife (3d12, Psi, Melee)
Defenses Hardened Polyceramic Overlay (-5 to enemy AP qualities)
Fittings Neural Activity Sensors
These vanishingly rare mechs were always somewhat experimental, even in the late days of humanity’s golden age. 
The sheer mass of sophisticated psitech components requires for their construction was almost impossible to acquire 
on the frontier, and the few Despites that are found in the modern day are almost always attached to Mandate military 
research facilities. While substantial mass and power are left unused to allow for pilot-specific fittings, even an unfitted 
Despite possesses enormous firepower. The psitech Finger of God weaponry can effortlessly bypass enemy armor, 
and the gigantic MES blade generated by its melee defense array can carve open a gravtank with a few solid strokes.
===== PAGE 316 =====
Name
XP
STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIS
CHA
3 (-2)  |  4-7 (-1)  |  8-13 (+0)  |  14-17 (+1)  |  18 (+2)
Boosts:   1st: 1sp (lvl 1)  |  2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)
3rd: 3sp (lvl 3)  |  4th: 4sp (lvl 6)  |  5th: 5sp (lvl 9)
Attributes
Homeworld
Species
Employer
Level
Readied Items Max Enc  =  STR ÷ 2
Cybernetics / Innate Abilities
Foci +1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 5, lvl 7 & lvl 10
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Lvl
Psionic Techniques +1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl  
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
+Mods
Name
Weapons                                                                                     Range and Ammo              Total Atk Bonus
Mods
Name AC
Mods
Name AC
Mods
Name AC
Armor
Background
Cost:  new value + 1 Max:  +2 at lvl 3  |  +3 at lvl 6  |  +4 at lvl 9
Administer
Shoot
Sneak
Stab
Survive
Talk
Trade
Work
Biopsionics
Metapsionics
Precognition
Telekinesis
Telepathy
Teleportation
Connect
Exert
Fix
Heal
Know
Lead
Notice
Perform
Pilot
Program
Punch
+3sp per lvl  (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat)
Warrior  =  +Lvl  |  Other  =  +(Lvl ÷ 2)
Partial Warrior  =  +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5Base Atk Bonus + Skill Points
Psionic Effort Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con Max:
Hitpoints / Conditions Max:
(1D6 + Con) x Level Warriors:  Additional +2 per level
System Strain
Max = CON
Permanent:
Saves
Physical Evasion Mental
16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha]
Stars Without Number Character Sheet
Lvl 11+ = +24
Lvl 10 = 93xp
Lvl 9 = 72xp
Lvl 8 = 54xp
Lvl 7 = 39xp
Lvl 6 = 27xp
Lvl 5 = 18xp
Lvl 4 = 12xp
Lvl 3 = 6xp
Lvl 2 = 3xp
Credits Debts
Class
===== PAGE 317 =====
Stowed Equipment (Backpack) Max Enc  =  STR 
Non-Encumbering Equipment
Equipment in Storage
Assets / Owned Property
Languages Known
Contacts and Allies
Aliases / ID’s
Notes to Remember
Vehicle, Robot, and Drone Details
Starship Details
Current Goals
Noteworthy Achievements
===== PAGE 318 =====
3 14• index
INDEX
A
Actions, Types of  48
Adept  270
Adventure Creation  
172–191
Adventure Seeds  186–190
Creating People  182–183
Creating Places  184–185
Creating Problems  
180–181
Example  191
Rewards  178
Aiding a Skill Check
  47
AI player characters  285
Aliens  202–209
Alien Player Characters  
209
Arcanist  268
Armor  64–65
Artifact  86
Shields  64
Armor Class  49, 64
Artifact Equipment  
86–89
Artificial Intelligences  
280–289
AI Damage and Repairs  
285
Processing Nodes  284
Processing Points  286
Routines  288–289
True AI PCs  285
Attack Bonus  24
Attributes  6
B
Backgrounds  9–15
Biopsionics  32–33
C
Character Advancement  
56
Character Creation  2–27
Advancement  56
Backgrounds. See Back-
grounds
Quick Character Creation  
26–27
Classes  16–18
Adept  270
Adventurer  18
Arcanist  268
Expert  17
Heroic Character Classes  
275
Magister  269
Psychic  17
True AI  287
Warrior  18
Combat  48–52
Actions  48
Burst Mode  66
Common Acts  50
Heroic Combat  276–277
Hitting  49
Initiative  48
Mech Combat  302
Morale  59
Shock  68
Space Combat  114–119
Two-Weapon Fighting  
52
Combat armor  64
Command Points  115
Converting First Edition 
Stars Without 
Number  236
Credits  60
Crises. See Ship Crises
Cyberware  82–85
D
Death  53
Lazarus patch  74
Defying Doom  277
Disarming a Foe  52
Diseases  58
Draco, AI  280
Drones  80
E
Effort. See Psionics, 
Effort
Employees  77
Encumbrance  60
Equipment  60–91
Modding and Building  
90–91
Execution Attacks  52
Expert System Bots  196
F
Factions  210–229
Actions  214–215
Assets  212
Bases of Influence  216
Cunning Assets  218–219
Example Factions  227
Force Assets  220–221
Goals  217
Tags  224–225
Turns  212
Wealth Assets  222–223
Falling  58
First Wave of Coloniza-
tion  122
Foci  19–23
Arcane Foci  272–273
Focus List  20–23
Forcing Enemy Move-
ment  52
Fray Die  276
G
Game Master Resources  
230–247
Common Complications  
232–234
One-Roll NPCs  244
One-Roll Patrons  245
One-Roll Urban Encoun-
ters  246
One-Roll Wilderness 
Encounters  247
Golden Age of Man  120
H
Hacking  54–55
Hard Vacuum  58
Healing  53
Heroic Characters  
274–279
Defying Doom  277
Fray Die  276
Heroic Combat  276–277
Nemesis Foes  278
History of Space  
120–127
Timeline  126–127
Hit Dice 195
Hit Points  24, 195
House Rules  237
I
Initiative  48
Instant Action  48
J
Jump Gates  123
L
Languages  24
Lazarus patch  74
Lifestyle Costs  77
M
Maestros, AI  126
Magister  269
Main Action  48
Maltech  62
Mechs  300–311
Designing Mechs  304
Example Mech Designs  
310
Maintenance  303
Mech Combat  302
Metadimensional Extro-
version Syndrome  
28
Metapsionics  34–35
Morale  59, 195
Move Action  48
N
Name Generators  
238–243
O
On Turn Action  48
Opposed Skill Checks  47
P
Pharmaceuticals  73
Phylactery, AI  283
Poisons  58
Postech  63
Powered armor  64
Precognition  36–37
Pretech  63
Primitive armor  64
Processing Nodes  284
Processing Points  286
Psionic Authority  122
Psionics  28–43
Biopsionics  32–33
Effort  31
Metapsionics  34–35
Precognition  36–37
Psionic Disciplines  30
Techniques  30
Telekinesis  38–39
Telepathy  40–41
Teleportation  42–43
Torching  31
===== PAGE 319 =====
index •3 15 
R
Radiation  58
Reaction Rolls  192
Robots and VIs  196–199
VI Player Characters  199
Rounds, Combat  48
S
Saving Throws  24, 46
Scenes  46
Scream, The  124
Second Wave of Coloni-
zation  124
Sector Creation  128–169
Atmosphere  160–161
Biosphere  164–165
Points of Interest  
170–171
Population  166–167
Tech Level  168
Temperature  162–163
World Tags  132–161
Services  77
Shields  64
Ship Crises  116, 118
Shock  68
Silence, The  124
Skill Checks  47
Skills  7–8
Magic Skill  266
Skill Checks  47
Skill List  8
Societies  290–299
Flavoring the Society  
298–299
Origin  292–293
Ruled  296–297
Rulers  294–295
Space Combat  114–119
Command Points  115
Departments  114
Ship Combat Actions  117
Ship Crises  116, 118
Space Magic  266–273
Arcane Foci  272–273
Casting Magic  267
Incandescent Order, The  
270–271
Space Travel  110–111
Starships  92–119
Building  94
Combat. See Space 
Combat
Defenses  101
Example Starships  
104–107
Fittings  96–100
Hulls  94–95
Maintenance and Repair  
113
Modifying  108–109
Sensors and Detection  
112–113
Travel  110–111
Weaponry  102–103
Street armor  64
Systems  44–59
Encumbrance  60
Modifying Starships  
108–109
Quick Reference  59
System Strain  32
T
Technology Levels  63
Telekinesis  38–39
Telepathy  40–41
Teleportation  42–43
Terran Mandate  122
Tiberius Crohn  120
Trade, Interstellar  235
Transhuman Campaigns  
248–265
Character Generation  
253
Digital Combat  260
Digital Programs  261
Digital Shells  258
Mechanical Shells  
256–257
One-Roll Polity Missions  
264
Organic Shells  254–255
Polities  262–264
Polity Mission Rewards  
265
Reputation  251
Shells  249
Souls  248
The Net  258–261
Wealth and Face  250–251
True AI Class  287
V
Vehicles  78–79
Virtual Intelligences  197
VI Player Characters  199
W
Weapons
Against Ship Hulls  94
Artifact  87
Heavy  69
Mech  308
Melee  68
Ranged  66–67
Starship  102–103
Vehicle  78
World Tags  132–161
X
Xenobestiary  192–209
Alien Player Characters  
209
Aliens  202–209
Beasts  200–201
Humanity  194–195
Reaction Rolls  192
Robots and VIs  196–199
ImPerIshable galaCTIC oVermInds
/\|<|-|²°²°
Aaron Michael Martin
Adam
Adam Doochin
Adam Dray
Adam Freitag
Adam G.
Adam Whitcomb
Adrià Prat
Adrian Coombs-Hoar
Adrian Stymne
Ai-Viet Lam
Alan Edens
Alec Hunter
Aleksandr Filipovich
Alex Duden
Alex Gagnon
Alex Hobbit Sennert
Alex O
Alexander
Alexander Cain
Alexander DiMieri
Alexander Ellis
Alexander Gräfe
Alexander Ihle
Alexander Kimball
Alexander Reilly-Vinicombe
Alexander Wilkinson
Allan Hise
Amira “Unity” Izengor
Amnet
Ana
Andrew “Zakero” Moore
Andrew Decker
Andrew Swift
A ndrew Webb
Andy Buell
Anthony Parsch
Arthreas
Arthur Braune
Arthur Decaneas
Arturs Leitans
Austen Higgins-cassidy
Bavo
BC Parker III
Ben
Ben Fierce
Benjamin Chojnacki
Benjamin Copeland
Benjamin Russell
Beth Hosek
Billy O Carter
Blaine Murawski
Bob Minadeo
Bobloblah
Brandon Tomlinson
Brandon Wiley
Brandon Wu
Brendan
Brendan G. Conway
Brett Bozeman
Brian
Brian Bleakley
Brian Isikoff
Bruno Buss
Bryan Considine
Bryan Meyer
Bryan Tholen
Bryce Clifton
burttd2010
Caleb Seek
Calle Englund
Cameron Jacobs
Carl Brian Mattsson
C a rl Tu r ner
Carl Woeck
Casey James Bates
Chad
Chad Andrew Bale
Charles Phillips
Charles Pugsley
Chase Waliky
Chaz Rosado
Chip Warden
Chris Clary
Chris Collins
Chris Gunning
Chris Herrell
Chris Londrie
Chris McCollum
Chris McDougall
Chris Montroy
Chris Tavares
Christian Leonhard
Christoffer Andersson
Christopher Avery
Christopher Hamilton
Christopher Laginja
Christopher Mangum
Chuck
ChuckB
Clark Landis
Clark Tollefsen
Claude Martins
Claude Weaver III
Clay Dennis
Clayton Rennie
Coffey Kin, Barista of Valoria
Colin Lampson
Connor Clark
Conor Lydic
Corbin
Cousin Artaud
Craig Johnson
Craig Long
Crystal Rivers
Cyberrottie
DacholaEtecoon
Dactylus
Dale Martin
Damian Henderson
Damian Trujillo
Dan Rogart
Daniel
Daniel Alm D ´Adda
Daniel Gregory
Daniel Johnson
Daniel Ley
Daniel Newman
Da n iel Tor res
Daniel Ziegler
Darío Tórtola Navarro
Darren Johnson
DarthThrawn
David Bresson
David Cole
David D.
David Futterrer
David J. Hastings
David Rybacki
David Tetley
Dawid Wojcieszynski
Derik Badman
Desiree C
Det. Sgt. Keaton Kumar
Devon “All Daggers” Anderson
Devon Mymko
Dickmuncher5001
Diversify
Donald A. Turner
Donna Howard
Doug Elliott
Doug Grimes
Drew Wright
Edd Glasper
Edgar Johnson
ElyEzer Lima da Costa
Eric
Eric Blair
Eric Haste
Eric Jackson
Eric Ullman
Eric Webre
Erik
Erik Hansen
Erik Johnson
Erin Congdon
Ethan
Ethan Deneault
Everitt Long
Evil Kill One
Exodus Phyr
F
Fernie
Filthy Monkey
Frank
Frank Dickerson
Fritjof Olsson
Frits Kuijlman
Gadigan
===== PAGE 320 =====
3 16• baCkerS
IllusTrIous kICksTarTer baCkers
$ P A C E B O Y $ 3 0 0 1
100Luck
A. Purroy
a.merrill.c@gmail.com
Aamir, Benoit, Izzy, Ema, and 
Isaac
Aaron Berger
Aaron DeChant
Aaron J Pianka
Aaron J. Schrader
Aaron Lim
Aaron Marks
Aaron Pollock
Aaron Terrell
Aaron Vincent
Aaron Webb
Aaron Winemiller
Abdul Rasyid
Abimael Montalvo
Achim Kaltz
Ackinty
Adam
Adam Ackerman
Adam Buick
Adam Buti
Adam C
Adam Chance
Adam Coleman
Adam Crandall
Adam Crossingham
Adam Crump
Adam Derda
Adam Duffy
Adam Kluga
Adam Koebel
Adam Leif
Adam Makey
Adam Mertes
Adam Metz
Adam Oedekoven
Adam Ozment
Adam Poppenheimer
Adam Rajski
Adam Rogers
Adam Schwaninger
Adam Shepherd
Adam Snyder
Adam Thompson
adam.y.rayes@wmich.edu
adamlanthier@gmail.com
Addison Noxy
Adrian Lazaro Breto
Adrián López
Adrián Rico
Adrian Smith
Adrian Yalj
Adriano Alberti La Marmora
Adrienne
Adumbratus
Ahmad Dialdin
Aidan
AJ
AJ Fritz
AJ Hines
AJ Pettengill
Akubaar and the Snowchicken
Alan
Alan Cohen
Alan Lough
Alastair Yates
Alban
Alberto Camargo
Alex
Alex Bainbridge-Robb
Alex Brooks
Alex Davey
Alex Gambrel
Alex Hayes
Alex Hesketh
Alex London
Alex Pastena
Alex Schor
Alex Shiley
Alex Spooner
Alex Thompson
A lex Torres
Alex Wreschnig
Alexander
Alexander Dustin Leavitt
Alexander Gonnella
Alexander Hack
Alexander Mulhern
Alexander O. Smith
Alexander Storey
Alexander Szczuczko
Alexander Ulbricht
Alexandre L. Lescarbeau
AlexBrodie
AlexDemille
Alexey
Alexis Cole
Alfmeister
Alfonso Carrillo
Alfonso Junquera Perez
Alicia Carr
Alistair Collins
Alkemi
Allan Bray
Allan Kumka
Allan MacKenzie-Graham
Allan Rodda
Allen Gimenez
alx
Amanda “OwlBear” Hather
Amr
Anbaraen
Anders Aronsson
Andras Furness
André Bogaz e Souza
Andre Ragsdale
André, Alias DD
Andrea Casamassima
Andreas Loeckher
Andreas Timel
Andreaz Forsgren
Andrej Poljak
Andres G Aguirre
Andrew
Andrew Anilkumar
Andrew Armstrong
Gajus Miknaitis
Garrett
Gary
Ged Trias
Geoffrey Rodebaugh
Giaus
Gina Ricker
Glenn Driver
Glenn K Gammon
GrazulDazul
Greg
Greg Davis
Greg McWhirter
Griffin D. Morgan
Gwarh
Hamad Al-Mannai
Hariel Pereira
Harry0001
Hipes
Hu1k5mash
Hubnutzen
Hunter Bodoh
Ian Saint
Isaac West
Izberion
J Patrick Stebbins
J. Budovec
J. D. Beers
Jacob Lund
Jacob M. T.
Jacob Poulette
Jacob Stuart
Jai
Jake Parker
James Hill
James Owens
James Porter
James V
Jameson Mulroney
Jamie Cook
Jamie Duke
Jamie Manley
Jasmine Galanodel
Jason
Jason Duke
Jason Kennelly
Jason Sprowl
Jason Stewart
Jay Rab
Jay White
JB Joyner
jbertucci40
Jeff Craig
Jeff Scifert
Jeff Szusz
Jeff Zitomer
Jerry G Prochazka
Jerry Weiler
Jim Pheric Donaldson
Jimmy Locatelli
JM Navarro
Joan A. Fontas
Joaquín Aguirrezabalaga
Joe Wasson
Joel Callahan
John A W Phillips
John B. McCarthy
John Bowlin
John Haberle
John Ivor Carlson
John Marshall
John Mehrholz
John Robertson
John Wancho
Jon Mayo
Jon Stein
Jonathan Lovin
Jonathan Moyer
Jordan
Jose LaCario
Joseph Brown
Joseph Cruz
Joseph Nathaniel Harrell
Joseph Paxson
Josh Reynolds
jtc1975
Jumaani Davison
Justin
Justin Crowther
Justin Vander Schaaf
Kahleel Hassan
Karl Stevens
Karl Vestin
Kathryn V. Fields
Keith E. Clendenen
Kelly Griffin
Kenneth MacNeal
Kevin
Kevin Brown
Kevin Davis
Kevin Harris
Kevin Langley
Kevin Parrish
Kickbacker
Kirby Bridges
Kirk Katzburg
Kristopher Rodrigues
Kyle Charron
Kyle Garrett
Kyle Pinches
Kynnin Scott
Laconic
Lanord
ldhtv
Leonard Rosenkranz
LetsHunt
Lexi Taylor
Linus Råde
Lippai.Peter
Lorenzo Gatti
Lukas Sommerauer
M. Sean Molley
Mads Ammitzbøll
MagnusLL
Manwell Hung
Marc Chretien
Marc D. Natural
Mario Butter
Mark Braasch
Mark Sieger
Mark Solino
Markus Florén
Marshall Miller
Martin Legg
Martin Schramm
Mason
Matt
Matt Lalemand
Matt McDonald
Matt Silver
Matteo Cantelmi
Matthew Escher
Matthew Orwig
Matthew Pemble
Matthew Wallace
Mattias Nilsson
Max Ward
Meciel
Megan Andrew
Mendel
Michael Blank
Michael Drew
Michael Gray
Michael Johnson
Michael Kennedy
Michael Kusternig
Michael Little
Michael Lord
Michael Stevens
Michael Wightman
Michael Wood
Michael Zacharias
Michal
Mike Leone
Mike Teuscher
Mike Westley
Milak
Mindy Bruecher
Mitch Perkins
Mortaneus
Mykal Wells
Nathan G.
Nathan Gillispie
Nathan Grainger
Nathan Trail
Nathanael Cole
Nathaniel James
Nicholas Taylor
Nicolaj Vinholt
Nicolas Johnson
Nikolas Kieker
Noé Falzon
NovanIV
Olaf Buddenberg
Pandiano
Patrice Mermoud
Patrick Healey
Patrick Ludwig
Paul
Paul Acree
Paul Bird
Paul Browning
Paul Hampshire
Paul Hillers
Paul Mitchell
Peet Conrick
Per Mevius
Pete Shaw
Peter Heeringa
Phil Bordelon
Phil Stepp
Philip Hindley
Philip Rogers
Philip Wan
Phillip Sacramento
QuirkyAI
Radosław Grzanka
Randall D Bailey, Jr
Randy Andrews
Raymond Weidner
Redfuji6
Reece Adams
REM
RemoteRyan
Rich Spainhour
Richard
Richard Sorden
Rise Up Design
Rob Martine
Robert Baldridge
Robert Bersch
Robert De Luna
Robert Gamble
Robert Kukuchka
Robert M
Robert Panzer
Roberto Micheri
Roh
Rolunde
Ron Smay
Ron Veirs
Ross Shaw
Russell Beidler
RuthlessSimster
rvn1972
Ryan Leavengood
Ryan Poe
Sam Sarphatie
Sammi Hadert
Samuel Ford
Sanicos
Sascha Schewe
SaveSriracha
Scott Chisholm
Scott Edward Nash
Scott Elderkin
Scott Stenroos
Scott Templeman
Scott Wingate
Sean Zaleski
Seth MacQuade Parker
sgetty
Shaun Froude-Powers
Shaun Reid
Shawn
Shawn P
Simon Early
Simone Pietro Spinozzi
Skellious
Skytherin
Stacie Winters
Starfox98011
Stéphane Palmeri
Stephen
Stephen ‘Woody’ Woodley
Stephen Brandon
Stephen Chen
Stephen Lee
Stephen Malone
Steven Dolges
Steven L Cowan
Steven M. Smith
Stoperssonn
Sudanna
Taiga Brenerman
Tanner Critz
Tarr y Higgins
Taylor Richardson
Terr y Chay
Thalji
ThePiachu
Thomas Biskup
Thomas Bock
Thomas Graham
Thomas L. Azar, Jr.
Thomas Marcarello
Thomas Saboy
Thomas Woodall
Tim Baker
Timothy N Turba
Todd
Todd Gibel
Todd Stephens
Tom Drever
Tony Bada no
Tracy O’Brien
Tripp Ritter
Tyler Brisbin
Ulf H.
uzlug
Vic Smith
Vicente Cartas Espinel
Vince Mahoney
Vincent
Vincent Brown
Vincent Kindfuller
Walrex x
William Alexander
William Drummond
William Raillon
Wraith
Wright Johnson
Xzov
Yann Abaziou
Zachariah Lund
Zak Ralston
Zak Schultz
Zeke Hamlin
===== PAGE 321 =====
baCkerS •3 1 7 
Andrew Bedoy
Andrew Behrens
Andrew Bennett
Andrew Berdan
Andrew Best
Andrew Branstad
Andrew Broseidon Church
Andrew Byers
Andrew D Devenney
Andrew Dooley
Andrew Dylan Wheatley
Andrew Ertl
Andrew Fielder
Andrew Franklin
Andrew G.M. Sim
Andrew Gil
Andrew Glencross
Andrew Gold
Andrew Gordon
Andrew Harter
Andrew Hébert
Andrew Ho
Andrew Johnson
Andrew Jordan DeWitt
Andrew Laliberte
Andrew Lorenz
Andrew McMenemy
Andrew Moss
Andrew Murray
Andrew Neale
Andrew Nordstrom
Andrew Piseck
Andrew Rachunok
Andrew Schleifer
Andrew Stafford
Andrew Sutton
Andrew Taylor
Andrew Vikinger Gill
Andrew Whitwham
Andrew221
Andy Slack
Angelo Pileggi
ANGLICO
Anker Foss
Ann Marie
Anon
Antero Garcia
Anthony
Anthony Dalia
Anthony Foderaro
Anthony Hansen
Anthony Paul Rota
Anthony Puhl
Anthony Ragan
Anthony Stillwagon
Antoine Lenoir
Antonio Soriano
Antti Luukkonen
Antwan
aprrrl
ArchDuke Baron
Aric
Ariel Surya
Ariel Thomas
Armisael
Aron Morris
Aron Smith
arosales@mgroomer.com
Arthur Perkins
Arthur Reed Snyder, Jr.
Artistic New Directions
Ary Ramsey
Asa
AsenRG
Aser Tolentino
Atlictoatl
Audun Beck
August Karl Pokorak
Aureliano Hornos
Aurélien Laurent David 
Bersano
Austin
Austin Lawr
Auston Schrougham
averyfinecat
Avram Grumer
AW
Azlunde
B
B. Eidsor
B.A. Umberger
Bad Example
Badukd0
Baff
BAK
Bakshi Mushailov
Barry Dewey-Robertson
Barry Swodeck
Barry T Snyder
Bartek Ewertowski
Bartłomiej Gniatkowski
BattleMats
bd9538@gmail.com
Beast
Ben
Ben Friedman
Ben Gallardo
Ben Hale
Ben Hardekopf
Ben J B
Ben Landers
Ben Lewis-Evans
Ben Pice
Ben Potts
Benjamin Baer
Benjamin Brown
Benjamin Davidson
Benjamin Norby
Benjamin Odegaard
Benjamin Reggett
Benjamin Rivers
Benja min Terr y
benomnes@gmail.com
Beregon
Bern Osterhaug
Bgabin
Bill Vee
Billk
Bjørn Benjaminsen
Bjørn Døstrup Christensen
Black Eagle
Blackwood Melrose
Blain Brigance
Blair Giles
BlaiseLighter
Blarghedy
Blaze Utz
bleftwich
Blue Tyson
Bob Clifford
Bob Mosdal
Bob Olsson
Bobby Frost
Boredom Rules
Boris
Braden Todd Curtis
Bradford Barrett
Bradley Allen
Brand Robins
Brandon Boulter
Brandon Metcalf
Brandon Robertson
Brandon Wolff
Brass Jester
Brenna M
Brennan Dawson
Brent Walters
Breton Vander Zouwen
Brett Gonta
Brett Kassel
Brett Pierani
Brett Volz
Brettly S.
Brian “Commodore Strargazer” 
Whitcraft
Brian Babyok
Brian Carson-Plybon
Brian Ericson
Brian Fowler
Brian Gute
Brian Habenicht
Brian Holden
Brian Houle
Brian Hubbard
Brian Johnson
Brian Kirchhoff
Brian Kudlicki
Brian M
Brian McDonald
Brian McGillivray
Brian Novotny
Brian Pendleton
Brian Perkins
Brian Pierce
Brian Spinetti
Brian Stafford
Brian Wickhem
Brian Wright
Brody Hawkins
Brogen
Bruce Alexander Marshall
Bruce E. Coulson
Bryan
Bryan Jenkins
Bryan Kendall
Bryan O.
Bryan Parry
Bryant Durrell
Bryce Duzan
Bullfrog
Burnsy
Burtin David
C P
C P Johnston
C. Hamilton
C. Lee Vermeers
C.P. Stanford
C.R. Harper
Cal Kotz
Cale
Caleb
Caleb Michael Powers
Calle
CallMeWilliam
Callum Ballantyne
Callum Moore
Calvin Smith
Calvin Yiu
Camaxtli Lopez
Cameron Paine
Cameron Webb
Camryn Hebert
Captain of the Trigati
Cardinal
Caree Parson
Carey Newhouse
Carey Williams
Carl
Carl Clare
Carl Hickman
Carl James Black
Carl Martinsson
Carl Speakman
Carl Walter
Carlos Eduardo da Silva Leal
Carlos Torrea lba
Carmelo Di Noto
Carroll J Hunter
Carson Talley
Carsten Magerkurth
Carter Guy
Cas Hoffman
Casey
Casey Garske
Casey Shelton
Caz
cdaniel
CdeB
Cemal
Chair grills
Chamo
Chance
ChaosModifier
Charles
Charles Blanco
Charles McKnight
Charles Summerhill
Charles Wuchner
CharlesDM
Chase Day
Chase Uehara
Chase Walker
Chelan Blankinship
ChosenShadow
Chris
Chris Allison
Chris Archer
Chris Ballmann
Chris Bernhardi
Chris Bertram
Chris Best
Chris Chambers
Chris Clinton
Chris Dagen
Chris Del Gigante
Chris Edwards
Chris Galecki
Chris Gardiner
Chris George
Chris Halliday
Chris Harvey
Chris Hasson
Chris Hu
Chris Jahn
Chris Jansky
Chris Kalapodis
Chris Kenna
Chris Lawrence
Chris Matuszek
Chris Miller
Chris Mitchell
Chris Mitchell
Chris Nason
Chris Pickel
Chris S
Chris Slazinski
Chris Slowinski
Chris Sparke
Chris Taylor
Chris Trigger
C h r is Tu r ner
Chris Wagener
Chris Wagner
Chris Westbrook
Chris Whitney
Chris Wilms
chrispalmasi@gmail.com
Christian Corey
Christian Eilers
Christian Kitchener
Christian Korslund
Christian Pozzali
Christian Svalander
Christof Berger
Christoffer Eriksson
Christophe Bj Breysse
Christopher “Kier” Conroy
Christopher Aaron Johnson
Christopher Alan Slater
Christopher Blackett
Christopher Bruce
Christopher Callagan
Christopher Coulthard
Christopher Crowe
Christopher D Meid
Christopher Krueger
Christopher Lavery
Christopher Lee
Christopher Lee Kemper
Christopher M
Christopher Morley
Christopher Peter
Christopher Pietrzak
Christopher Querfurth
Christopher Robichaud
Christopher S. Knott
Christopher Trdan
Christopher Wiebe
Chuck Dee
Cian Shay
Ciril Neukom
Claes Svensson
Claire West
Clay Broeker
Clay Fowler
Clay Gardner
Clay Vernon
Clayton Higbee
Clément Perrochaud
Cliffjord
Clint Cachia
Clint Okerstrom
Clint Williams
Clint1337
Cody
Cody Hines
Cody Maggard
Cody Marbach
Cole Brown
Cole Nordin
Colin
Colin “Vindexus” Kierans
Colin Fredericks
Colin Mayer
Colin Sinclair
Colin Urbina
Colineff
ColinJ
Collin
Collin O’Connor
Colm O’Hara
Cominius
Conall Hammond
Connor
Constantin Patrascu
Contesse
Corey Hall
Cory Heminger
Cottar Bort
CP
CP McInerney
Craig
Craig A Tyler
Craig Bishell
Craig Concepcion
Craig Janssen
Craig Senatore
Craig Wright
Cristian
Crosse
Croy Salinas
Cryoban
CTibbs123
Cultist of Sooty
Curt Meyer
Cutter Goode
CyberHippie
D Morris
Daimadoshi_CL
Dain Lybarger
Dale
Dale C. Blessing
Damion Meany
Damon Wilson
Dan
Dan Barton
Dan Behlings
Dan Brackmann
Dan Cruickshank
Dan Hindmand
Dan Koeplinger
Dan Lalich
Dan Luxenberg
Dan Martland
Dan Vince
Dane Holden
Dane R
Dani Jang
Daniel “Aziraphale” Holmbäck
Daniel Bayless
Daniel Cleveland
Daniel Crisp
Daniel Davis
Daniel Drake
Daniel Dudugjian
Daniel Engström
Daniel Fernández García
Daniel Forinton
Daniel Freeman
Daniel G. Dyrda
Daniel Grondin
Daniel J. Bishop
Daniel Jonsson
Daniel Kühbacher
Daniel Lawrence
Daniel Lofton
Daniel Maberry
Daniel Markwig
Daniel Maxson
Daniel Mayer
Daniel McSorley
Daniel Nordström
Daniel Norton
Daniel Ravipinto
Daniel Rodriguez
Daniel Sattich
Daniel Skrivanek
Daniel Spencer
Daniel Stack
Daniel Stewart
Daniel Ungooglable Danilenko
Daniel Valda
Daniel Winter Good
Daniel Yauger
Danielle Weaver
Dante Van Devva
Darren MacLennan
Darryl Hills
Darth JoDa
Darth Krzysztof
Daryl Holm
Daug45
Dave
Dave Boyd
Dave Dunaway
Dave Kester
Dave Sherohman
Dave Wolf
David
David (Jester’s) Craft
David Bowes
David Comer
David Csobay
David Daw
David Dickinson
David Dodge
David Donohoo
David E
David Gallo
David Ginsburg w/Tales from 
the Fandom podcast
David Goren
David Harrison
David Jenks
David Johnston
===== PAGE 322 =====
3 1 8• baCkerS
David Jordan
David Karlsson
David Keijser
David Klemish
David Lai
David Leong
David Lindsay
David Little
David Margowsky
David Martel
David Menefee
David Moreland
David Murphy
David Nebauer
David Nixon
David Paul Guzmán
David Priestley
David Renna
David Ross
David Rubin
David Scoggins
David Shugars
David Sullivan
David Viars
David Wellcome
David Yellope
David Zimmerman
david.horrocks
Dawei Yao
DD Ra
De Bona Michaël
DeadDocus
Deborah A. Dunlap
Declan Cox
Declan O’Brien
Demetrius K.
Demonhunter198
Denis Ricard
Dennis Binder
Dennis Malloy
Dennis Osborne
Dennis Sieg
dennis.witt@protonmail.ch
Derek Mitchell
Derek Schwab
Derek Watkins
Derrick Cook
Derrick Dodson
desrtfx
Devin Janelle
Devin King
Devin McIntyre
Devon
DGSnyder
Dick Boardman
Diego Ramirez
Dillon Burke
Dimensionld@yahoo.com
Diogo Nogueira
Dirk Nobels
DivNull Productions
Djroma12@aol.com
docshadow13
DocSocrates
Dohtoor
Dominic Bozzo
Dominic Moore
Dominick Trascritti
Dominik Pielarski
Don
Donald Welsh
Donnovan
Dorion
Dorjan Smoković
dotha1dave@gmail.com
Doug “Kosh” Williamson
Doug Hurst
Doug Mercer
Doug Miller
Doug Pirko
Dr. Alberto Colombo
Dr. Marko Poleczek
Dr. VanPorcine
dragon513@comcast.net
Draško Prašnički
Drew
Drew C. W.
Drew Hurdle
Drew Walker
Drnoodles
drnuncheon
Drwgbliadd@gmail.com
Ducke
Dustin Headen
Dustin Knie
Dustin_00
Dylan Green
Dylan Mikus
Dylan Prentiss
Dylan Sinnott
Dylan Vincent Distasio
Dylan Whitney
E.T.Smith
Earl Scott Nicholson
Ecintron
Ed Dobies
Ed Kilcawley
Ed Silver
edchuk
Edgar Burke
Eduardo Inza
Edward Engquist
Edward Fewtrell
Edward Hand
Edward Kabara
Edward Kline
Edward Mallett
Eigen Ignacio
Eirik Oterholm Nielsen
Elad Hen
Eldrvarya
Elijah “Razu” Reyes
EM
Emil Wisti
Emlyn Breese
Enoch Starnes
EnterElysium
Eother
Eric
Eric Grice
Eric Koch
Eric Levanduski
Eric Lopez
Eric Maloof
Eric Matta
Eric Rumfelt
Eric Sanday
Eric Schaffer
Eric Williamson
Erich L.
Erick Carlson
Erick Vallejos
Erik Belsaas
Erik Dupont
Erik Halvarsson
Erik Labelle
Erik Schmidt
Erik Talvola
Eri k Ten kar
Erik Turner
Erkan
Erratication
Espen Otlo
Ethan
Ethan Eichstedt-Anderson
Ethan Harris
Ethan Jackson
Ethan Mc Donald
Ethan Monahan
Ethan Trovillion
Ethan Zarembski
Etienne Olieu
Euclides Pereyra
Eva-Fiona Denehy
Evan
Evan Cohen
Evan Garay
Evan Gilbreath
Evan Lee
Evan Stark
evangben1999@gmail.com
Every Other Weekend Gaming
Evil Midnight Lurker
Ezann
Ezzarius
Fabio Almeida
Fabio Milito Pagliara
Facephase
fanguarn
Farid Kutyev
faultedravage28@gmail.com
Fedly Guerrier
Felisberto Lagartinha
Felix Grothkopp
Felix Roithmayr
Felix Rosenberger
FelTK
FeralGames
Fernando Segismundo Alonso 
Garzón
Fery
Filip Ogrodowczyk
Finbar Deane-Stott
FireSerpent
Flávio Stresser
Flession
flibb
Florent Poulpy Cadio
Florian Aßmann
Florian Hübner
Florian Ziesche
Fnorder
Forrest Fleming
Foxman
Francois Fleury
Francois Giuntini
Frank Falkenberg
Frank Mitchell
Frank Perrin
Frank T onn
Frankie
Franko F
Frantisek Bujnoch
Fraser Imrie
Fred Parham
Fred Ramsey
Freddie Bell
Freddy Pollock
Frederick Münch
Frederick Richmond
FredH
Fredrik Larsson
frostalma@gmail.com
furstenberger
G. Hartman
Gabriel Sorrel
Gabriele Fasano
Gage
gajoos
Gallant Knight Games
Garbelion
Gareth Crees
Gareth Fowler
Gareth Harrison
Garrett Comerford
Garth Dighton
Gary Anastasio
Gary Furash
Gary London
Gary McBride
Gary Shelton
Gaston Keller
Gatis Melkus
Gavin Lemon
Gavin Mendeck
Gavin Mutter
Gene D.
Geoff Gillan
Geoff Watson
Geoffrey (Jetstream) Walter
Geoffrey Crouse
Geoffrey Goucher
Geoffrey Kerslake
Geoffrey T. Nelson
George & Maria Orlov
George Alexander
George Carter-Bennett
George Cummings
George G Hoeflinger
Gerald
Gerald Rose
Gerard Hoey
Gérard Kraus
Gerben van der Heijden
Germán Jakob
Gerrit Czeplie
Gerry Saracco
Gestaltar skiten
Geza Letso
Gideon Mecum
Giles Dorrington
Gillan Martindale
Glen King
Glen Parker 
Glenn Hallenberg
Glenn Rohrlach
Glenny Kenpachi Ramasama
Gord Sellar
Gordon Cranford
Gotta397
Grady Victory
Graeme Frear
Graeme Lewis
Graham Gentz
Graham Heath
Grant
Gray Shackelford
GreenWolf
Greg
Greg Mele
Greg Wood
Gregg Thomason
Gregory Stayner
Gretchen A
GrimLost
grogmonster
gstewart
gsugu
Guerin Payne
Gunnar Bangsmoen
Guy Reece
gwathdring
Gwendalyn Toh
Hannes Vilmi
Hanno
Hans BK
Hans-Jörg Meyer
Harpal Khalsa
Harrison Salzman
Harrison Snodgrass
Harrison Storer
Harrison W .
Harry Danby
Harry John Shephard
Harry Smith
Hauke Fock
Hayden Churchill
Heinrich Krebs
Hendell
Henrik Lemos
Henry
Henry “PandaDad” de Veuve
Henry Owen
Henry Ulrich
HerntheHunted
hidsnake
Hiltz
Hisher
Hobbs665
HolyBane
Horus
Hugo Marrero Ballesteros
Hunter Pfeiffer
Hunter Wiench
hydranoid52@live.com
Hydre
hyperotic
Iacopo Benigni
Iain Gillett
Ian & Catherine Woolley
Ian Borchardt
Ian Cunningham
Ian Donald
Ian Franklin
Ian Gibson
Ian Gunther
Ian Helmke
Ian Herbert
Ian McFarlin
Ian Runkle
Ian Scheffler
Ian Urbina
Ian Ward
Ian Williams
Ignatius Montenegro
Impius
InfiniteGeek
Inkwell Ideas
interiis
Inversions
Iowa Moondog
Ironhouse
Isaac ‘Will It Work’ Dansicker
Isaac VanDuyn
Isaac Wallace
Isabeau T. Silver Rain
Ishkar
Ismihall
Ivan Jalencas
Ivan Krechetov
Ivá n Tomás
J K Rasmussen
J. Michael Looney
Jaan Eerik Sõmermaa
Jack Clarke
Jack Fagan
Jack Gulick
Jack Harvey
Jack Liska
Jack Marshall
Jack Murphy, III
Jack Norris
Jack Sernovitz
Jack Shirai
Jackson Anderson
Jacob
Jacob “King” Barrick
Jacob Banda
Jacob Barrick
Jacob Derby
Jacob Dill
Jacob Poole
Jacob Repp
Jacob Schwartz
Jacques Nel
Jaden Gailey
Jake
Jake Akin
Jake Marsh
Jake Simon
Jake Steinmann
Jake Williamson
Jakob Schmidt
Jakob Zagone
James
James A
James B
James Barrie
James Burgess
James Carpio
James Corlett
James D’Amato
James Dillane
James Duffy
James Dunbier
James E Goodrich
James Ellis
James Forest
James Gilray
James Halmayr
James Heath
James Holden
James Holloway
James Husum
James Jordan
James Lund
James N Blevins
James Noble
James Overton
James Padley
James Petrosky
James Pintal
James Powell
James Pullen
James Ramirez
James Ritter
James Robertson
James Schmidt
James Smith
James T
James Taylor
Ja mes Toma zos
James V Nutley
Jameson Cunningham
Jamie
Jamie Eiichi Yoshida
Jamie Officer
Jan Novák
Jan van der Laan
Jan van der Wielen
Janne Hongisto
Janne Puonti
Ja rad W.
Jared Hatchell
Jared Norman
Jarikith - SpaceKatta Hero-U 
AGL589
Jarrett
Jarrod Maistros
Jason Allen
Jason Aschberger
Jason Bean
Jason Byrne
Jason Colombetti
Jason Corley
Jason Lee
Jason Lescalleet
Jason Mavor
Jason Orne
Jason Paasch
Jason Price
Jason Rampata
Jason Redford Drifter-Trenner
Jason Rieusset
Jason Scranton
Jason Tocci
Jason Wentworth
JavaJoeCoffee
Javier Koslow
Javier Perez Garcia
Jay Marsh
Jay Richards
Jay Ward
Jay son Tu r ner
JD
===== PAGE 323 =====
baCkerS •3 1 9 
Jean
Jean GAMBA
Jean-Christophe RANNOU
Jean-Francois CABIROL
Jeff Bernstein
Jeff Brooks
Jeff Dixon
Jeff Geisperger
Jeff H
Jeff Hincy
Jeff Kosko
Jeff Labrack
Jeff Long
Jeff Quick @jefftyjeffjeff
Jeff Smith
Jeff Stolarcyk
Jeff Threatt
jeffhar@udel.edu
Jeffrey
Jeffrey Allan
Jeffrey Allan Boman
Jeffrey Chapman
Jeffrey Doon
Jeffrey Elliott
Jeffrey Fuller
Jeffrey Head
Jeffrey Klingbeil
Jeffrey Lee
Jeffrey Meakins
Jeleinen
Jennifer
Jennifer and Mark Martin
Jennifer Timora Leedell
Jens Alm
Jens Stegemann
Jeramie
Jeremias Weber
Jeremy
Jeremy Baker
Jeremy Friesen
Jeremy Frost
Jeremy Kear
Jeremy Livingston
Jeremy Pickard
Jeremy Reed
Jeremy Scott
Jerry
Jerry Huckins
Jesper Nilsson Cyren
Jesse Alford
Jesse Roberge
Jessie Hickman
Jett
Jidairo
Jill Enke
Jim
Jim Alcala Sales
Jim DelRosso
Jim Dixon
Jim Hart
Jim May
Jim Montgomery
Jim Morris
Jim Sharples
Jim Stryker
Jim Young
Jimmy Gaylord
Jimmy Gertzog
Joakim Jonsson
João Mariano
Jodi Pink
Joe Bongi
Joe Campbell
Joe Hradec
Joe Ingledew
Joe Main
Joe Robinson
Joel
Joel Dunkelberg
Joely
Joey Schuringa
Johan Fält
Johan Kristian Worm
Johannes Paavola
John
John “evernevermore” Scheib
John “johnkzin” Rudd
John “Redring” Love
John Anderson
John Baldwin
John Barr
John Cohen
John Connelly
John Courtney
John Daly
John Davies
John DePaul
John Doyle
John Duffield
John Eisenhauer
John Even Bjørnevik
John Everett Till
John Farinelli
John Fiala
John Fitzgerald
John Gardner
John Greene
John Hacker
John Hammons
John Harper
John Jenson
John Kirkland
John Lemay
John Lorinskas
John M. Portley
John Marron
John Maven
John McDuff
John Michael Hess
John Moran
John Paul Ashenfelter
John Reaves
John Rose
John Roszkowski
John Ryan
John Snead
John Snee
John Stynes
John TK Veltman
John Ulbrech
John Unverferth
Johnathon Grach
JohnC
Johnny F. Normal
Jon Davison
Jon Finn
Jon Henrik Knapskog
Jon Kenkel
Jon Morris
Jon Munger
Jon Snodgrass
Jon Walker
Jon Wilson
Jonas Karlsson
Jonathan “Buddha” Davis
Jonathan “SteelSeraph” Steele
Jonathan Agens
Jonathan Cheatham
Jonathan Cliffen
Jonathan Fish
Jonathan Goodwins
Jonathan Korman
Jonathan Sherlock
Jonathon Byrer
Joonas Laakso
Jordan ‘Sendo’ Hardy
Jordan Lee Thompson
Jordan Raymond
Jordan White
Jordi Rabionet Hernandez
Jörg S.
Jose Alarico Teixeira Manzano
José Gilberto Olimpio Bezerra 
Júnior
José Luiz F. Cardoso
José Morillo
Jose Roberto Vidal
José Sánchez
Jose W. L.
Joseph
Joseph Anderson
Joseph Avolio
Joseph Bohan
Joseph Gerard Fredette
Joseph Glover
Joseph Hacker
Joseph Kim
Joseph Lafayette
Joseph LaMothe
Joseph Montano
Joseph Scarpace
Joseph Thorne
Joseph Wheeler
Josh
Josh ‘Tallknight’ Higgins
Josh Brauer
Josh Cairns
Josh D.
Josh Olsby
Josh Peters
Josh Rasey
Josh Rudolph
Josh Sjothun
Josh Williams
Joshua
Joshua Cameron
Joshua Crowe
Joshua James Gervais
Joshua kooistta
Joshua LH Burnett
Joshua Liebeskind
Joshua Louderback
Joshua M Eaves
Joshua Martinson
Joshua Nicholas Aeria
Joshua Price
Joshua Smith
Joshua Spaw
Joshua Straub
JTB3
JTDimino
Juan Cruz Balda Berrotarán
Juan Cruz Vidal Gomez
Juan Fernández
Juan Raigada
Judd
Judd M. Goswick
Jukka Eerikäinen
Julian
Julian Strauch
Julius Wollfarth Jr
Jürgen Mayer
Jussi Kenkkilä
Justin
Justin Bowen
Justin Chan
Justin Hamilton
Justin Hein
Justin Koopmans
Justin Miller
Justin N Lee
Justin R.
Justin Reardon
Justin Smith
justinsortega@gmail.com
Juuso Pennanen
JVMMs
JYK
K-Slacker
K.C . L’ Roy
Kai Mayer
kalletaekwondo@hotmail.com
Kalman Farago
Kamil Glowacki
Karim Dhambri
Karl Erik Hofseth
Karl Forster
Karl Hendricks
Karl Lanzetta
Karl Miller
Karl Scheer
Karsing
Kary “Realm Master K” 
Williams
Kascade
Kat Enyeart
Keegan Lindgren
Keiran Sparksman
Keith C. Datum
Keith Davies
Keith E. Hartman
Keith Mantell
Keith Mount
Keith Nelson
Kelly Jolliffe
Kelly Roberge
Kelsa
Kelton Lawrence
Ken Bradfield
Ken Pawlik
Ken Taylor
Ken Wen Lee
Kenik
Kenneth Hite
Kenneth Walz
Kennon Ballou
Kenny
Kenny Crouch
Kenny Murray
Kerry Clarkson
Kesipyc
Keven McDaniels
Kevin
Kevin Brennan
Kevin Chauncey
Kevin Cook
Kevin Dale
Kevin Kostello
Kevin Martin
Kevin Mayz
Kevin McHale
Kevin Patti
Kevin Schott
Kevin Searle
Kevin Smith
Kev in Tompos
Kevin Vasquez
Kevin Wagner
Kevin Whitaker
Kevin Williams
Kevin Wine
Khan Shawnery
Kian Dashti
Kieran McGowan
Kieran Swystun
Killian Kelly
Kim Long Vo
Kim Mazaraki
Kiraah
Kirstie Kurtenbach
Kirt Dankmyer
Kiwihiker
KJ
KJ Potter
Klaus Ole Kristiansen
Knut Ivar Hellsten
Koen Plate
Koen van Baaren
Koen van der Keijl
Kon-Ti k i
Kosta Kostulas
Kovács Zsolt
KP McGrath
Krister Blystad
Kristof Klee
Kristopher Volter
kschktnt
Kurt McMahon
Ky Grage
Kyle
Kyle Bedell
Kyle Burckhard
Kyle Duncan
Kyle Francoeur
Kyle Kiefer
Kyle McGeeney
Kyle Purkiss
kylepip
KyoshiroKami
L. Vollum
Labbiss
Lachlan Brad Easton
Lachlan Jones
Laith Noaman
Lakshman
Lance “UndeadViking” Myxter
Larry Hamilton (Follow Me, 
And Die!)
Larry Haught
LaughingShadows
Lauren Bond
Lauretha
Lazytron
Le Collen
Leah Elliott
Lee Corder
Lee Graham
Lee Moran
Lee Perry
LegionForty2
Len Borowski
Len Smith
Lena B
Leonard Brey
Leopold Stiegler
Lerolabell
Lethio
Levi Burtner
Lewis Cassidey
Liam Butler
Liam Foley
Liam Murray
liamscotthanson93@gmail.
com
Lian
Lilian Duault
Lily / LilypadNebula
Linda L. Martelle
Lisa Padol
Lithran
Lloyd Rasmussen
Logan Hyvonen
Logan Laberge
Loïc Cremer
Lolta
Longdirt Harri
Lonni Swanson
Lorange
Lord of Ice
Lordson Yen
Loren
Loren Thompson
Lorenzo Bandieri
Lou Bajuk
Love Smedfors
Lowsonic
lpaull
Luc Teunen
Luca Neukom
Lucas
Lucas Cooperberg
Lucas Cowell
Lucas Graves
Lucas Horton
Lucas Hyon
Lucas Katt
Lucas Ludlow
Lucas Mathias Haasum
Lucas McDaniel
Lucas Rodriguez San Pedro
Lucas Ward
Lucias Meyer
Lucifer War Machine
Ludanto
Lukas
Luke
Luke Cunningham
Luke Moran
Luke Phillips
Luke Skeirik
Luke Stowell
Luke Thomson
Luke Thrower
Luke Winters
Luke Wootton
M Newman
Maahk
Mååns Eriksson
Mabel Harper
Machi
Mackenzie
madbird-valiant
madkids
Mads Fallesen Johansen
Makki
Malcolm McLeod
Mangoose
ManlyMcBeefington
Manny
Mantakree
Marc Plourde
Marc Tabyanan
Marc Young
Marcelo Paschoalin
Marco
Marco Grosso
Marcus
Marcus Burggraf
Marcus Rosenfeld
Margaret Norris
Mario Moreau
Mark
Mark A. Siefert
Mark Andrew Faulkner
Mark Barr
Mark Carter
Mark Collins
Mark Delsing
Mark Giordano
Mark H
Mark Harris
Mark Jones
Mark Kostecky
Mark Kriozere
Mark Laird
Mark Lemmon
Mark MacDougal
Mark Malone
Mark Miller
Mark O’Mealey
Mark Quinn Corcoran
Mark Stanley
Mark Story
Markku
Markus Raab
Markus Sommer
Markus Viklund
Marley Griffin
MarsSenex
Martin
Martin Cliffen
Martin Greening
Martin Hrádela
Martin Krebs
Martin Mörtsell
===== PAGE 324 =====
320• baCkerS
Martin Nichol
Martin Teasdale-Blais
Marty
Marty Price
Martyn Meeks
Marzio Spairani
Masaki Yamazaki
Mathew Roy Mckendry
Matias B
Matías Nicolás Caruso
Matt
Matt ‘Haxar’ Shaw
Matt “9littlebees” Kay
Matt “Catapult” Wang
Matt Bauer
Matt Caulder
Matt Helms
Matt Jorgenson
Matt Logan
Matt Melero
Matt Sheridan
Matt Wilson
Mattaui
Matteo Signorini
Matteo Squillari
Matthäus Cebulla
Matthew
Matthew Aaron
Matthew Arbo
Matthew Asztalos
Matthew B
Matthew Barr
Matthew Caron
Matthew Cicchillo
Matthew Craner
Matthew Elcock
Matthew Franklin
Matthew Gagan
Matthew Grant
Matthew Jacques
Matthew Joel Stewart
Matthew Kinde
Matthew Koelling
Matthew Miller
Matthew Nixon
Matthew O’Connor
Matthew Sciscione
Matthew Shaver
Matthew Stark
Matthew Tucker
Mat t hew Tyler
Matthew Walden
matthew walker
Matthew Young
MatthewB
Matthias Haan
Max English
Max Kless
Max Perman
Max S
Max W ‘Prometheus’
Maxime Girard
Maxwell Baker
Maxwell Kennington III
Maxwell Madden
Maxwell Paige
MClodi
Medawolf
Megan Coppock
Mel Hall
Mel White
Melanie Ngo
Melissa Matos
Metal Fatigue
Michael
Michael “Mammut” Sauer
Michael almond
Michael Beekman
Michael Bogumill
Michael Bower
Michael Bowman
Michael Brewer
Michael Calarco
Michael Cody Meyer
Michael Collins
Michael D
Michael D Lusby
Michael David Pereira
Michael Demchak
Michael Derry
Michael DiBlasio
Michael Doa
Michael Durkee
Michael Ellison
Michael Feldhusen
Michael G. Palmer
Michael G. Potter
Michael Gissing
Michael Hengeli
Michael Hvorecny
Michael King
Michael Krzak
Michael Law
Michael Littlejohn
Michael Lizardi
Michael Lombardo
Michael Loy
Michael MacPherson
Michael Mase
Michael Mazzei
Michael Mundy
Michael Paul
Michael Paulini
Michael Pearson
michael pfeiffer
Michael Pineda
Michael Pruitt
Michael Ramsey
Michael Rice
Michael Sanders
Michael Schulz
Michael Shollar
Michael Smith
Michael Thompson
Michael Vitousek
Michael Waters
Michael Wolf
Michael Wright
Michael Yater
Micheal
Michel Cayer
Michel Polisena-Petrelli
Micky
Miguel Alvim de Almeida
Miguel Angel Castro
Mikael Bergström
Mikael Hansson
Mikael Oliger
Mikael Theorin
Mikael Tysvær
Mike “Laz” MacMartin
Mike “The Viking” May
Mike (wrathofzombie) Evans
Mike Campagna
Mike Carlson
Mike Fletcher
Mike Lange
Mike Loranger
Mike M
Mike Marshall
Mike Nusbaum
Mike Quintanilla
Mike Reilly
Mike Sands
Mike Suderman
Mike0815
Mikey Free
Mikolaj
Miles Griffiths
Miles Nerini
Misha Lumen
Mitch Lovell
Mitchel Pigsley
Mitchell Hannan
Mitchell Pipes
Mitchell Silverman
Montgomery Fort
MoosenHammer
Mordecai
Moritz Boehm
Morry Veer
Morten
Morten F Grosvold
Mr. Encyclopedia
MrTr ipleCC
Munashe
Murray Corradini
Mythforger
Naas
Nachofan
Nachtflug
Nadia Debogori
Namdorg
Nancy Feldman
Nat Webb
Nate Hiers
Nathan
Nathan Birch
Nathan Cashman
Nathan Christenson
Nathan Easton
Nathan Ellsworth
Nathan Gaudry
Nathan Joy
Nathan Milfull
Nathan Reetz
Nathan Schmitz
Nathaniel Bennett
Nathaniel Foster
Nathaniel Lanza
Nathaniel McIntyre
Neal Allen
Neal Dalton
Necrozius
Neil Roach
Neil Woodhouse
Nerdwerds
Nerra
Nessalantha
Nethulmeow
Newton Grant
Ngo Vinh-Hoi
Niall Boyd
Niall O’Donnell
Nicholas “Snuggly Wuggums” 
Baughman
Nicholas Bronson
Nicholas Cadigan
Nicholas Cassidy
Nicholas Clements
Nicholas Emricson
Nicholas G. Rais
Nicholas Goehring
Nicholas Hall
Nicholas Lee Goodman
Nicholas Muehlenweg
Nicholas Priebe
Nicholas Whaling
Nick
Nick Boughton
Nick Bower
Nick Carruthers
Nick Comber
Nick Pilon
Nick R.
Nick Roach
Nick Roland
Nick Ventricelli
Nick Zakhar
Nicklas Andersson
Nickolas
Nickolay Golubev
Nicolas Brian
Nicole Karel
Nigel Clarke
Nigel the Leptopus
Nik May
Nikita Levedis
Niklas Herbold
Niklas Österholm
Nikolai
Nikolaos Deligiannidis
Nikolay Samsonov
Nils Mahrwald
Ninh Qui Do
Nipper Phinizy
Noah
Noah Caleb
Noah Connally
Noah Doyle
Noah Price McGillivray
Noël
Noofle
Odin Collins
Ogre
Oh Seung Han
Ola Håkansson
oldstevo
Oliver Gibney
Oliver Lind
Oliver Summers
Ols Jonas Petter Olsson
Omari Brooks
Omer Golan-Joel
Oneil
Orffen
Oscar Diez Martinez
Oscar Söderbäck
Otis Martin
Oubliette
Owen
Owen Davies
Owen Thompson
Owlglass
Oz Mills
p7
Pablo Pérez Gómez
Pablo Saldaña
Pandatheist
Paolo & Kyra
Paolo Robino
Paris Conte
Pat Slauson
Patrick Brannick
Patrick Brewer
Patrick Buckendorf
Patrick Cigno
Patrick Delisle
Patrick Emery
Patrick Fagan
Patrick Pilgrim
Patrick Riley
Patrick Sullivan
Patrick Trapp
Patrick Young
Patryk Adamski ‘Ruemere’
Patryk Misiapa
Paul
Paul “Ettin” Matijevic
Paul “Trkhellian” Morgan
Paul Amala
Paul Beakley
Paul Courtenay
Paul Duffy
Paul Evans
Paul Friswold
Paul Harrison
Paul Jenkinson
Paul Kalupnieks
Paul Kohler
Paul Mertz
Paul Messenger
Paul Mitchener
Paul Morell
Paul Sheppard
Paul Umbers
Pavel Ojeda
Paweł Litewka
pdcurry
Pedion Modular Battlefields
Pedro Salgado
Pedro-Juan Ferrer
Pedro(Te)
Penny Lantern
Per Olav
Pestilence
Pete Ho
Pete Petrusha (Imagining 
Games)
Peter Agg
Peter Bogdasarian
Peter Browning
Peter Colletti
Peter Engebos
Peter Gates
Peter Griffith
Peter Mazzeo
Peter Olfelt
Peter Smith
Peter Smits
Peter Stals
PeterThomas6
Petri Virtanen
Phil Corpuz
Philip
Philip Adler
Philip healy
Philip Kristoffersen
Philip Schneider
Philip Stein
Philip Williams
Philippe “Sildoenfein” D.
Philippe Daigneault
Philippe Gamache
Philippe Jofresa
Philippe Marcil
Philippe Marichal
Phill Calle
Phillip McGregor
Phillip Roszko
Phillip Stephen Wright
Phoenix8008
Phoenixabo
Phurl
Phyrexus
Physicsmason@gmail.com
PickleTheCat
Pierre-Philippe Renaud
PillB
Pixel_Kitty
Planet Deathstar
Pol Garcia i Oto
Poul Meyer
Preston Bruce
Prospero101
psychicblue
pulsemeat
Puppetminion
Qurrion
Racheal Miller
Raf Bressel
Rafal Kita
Rahshaad Benjamin
Ralph Mazza
Randall Orndorff
Randall Thyodore
Raphaël
Raphael Bombayl
Raskal
Ray Goerke
Ray M. H.
Ray Nolan
Raymond Barnes
rebtonguewriter@gmail.com
Recknar
Red
Redsean
Reg Langford
Reginald
Reid San Filippo
Reise, Reise
Rema Casprowiak
Rev. Keith Johnson
Rhialto the Marvellous
Ricardo Costa
Ricardo Fuente
Riccardo “Malbet” Caverni
Rich Lescouflair
Rich Wermske
Richard
Richard ‘Scylld’ Comfort
Richard ‘Vecna’ Hussey
Richard ‘Vidiian’ Greene
Richard “Bondo” Bondurant
Richard Barton
Richard Budop III
Richard Comfort
Richard Cumberland
Richard Dill
Richard Ellis
Richard Franey
Richard Gregory
Richard Leonard
Richard Ling
Richard Mundy
Richard O’Loughlin
Richard Powell
Richard Rivera
Richard Ross
Richard Ruane
Richard T. Balsley
Richard Watkins
Richzrd, Dark Lord of All
Rick Arneson
Rihards
Riley Chandler
Rimvidas Gabrėnas
Rob Abrazado
Rob Lowe
Rob Malo
Rob Miles
Rob Nadeau
Rob of the North
Rob Sansone
Rob Thomas
Rob Wieland
Rob Young
Robert
Robert Adair
Robert Clampitt
Robert Conley
Robert Davis
Robert Day
Robert DiDomenico
Robert G. Male
Robert Hysing Berg
Robert Kempe
Robert Kim
Robert Kosek
Robert Lai
Robert Mazique
Robert Miller
Robert Mohl
Robert Morrison
Robert Mull
Robert Oertly
Robert Ott
Robert Parini
Robert Saint John
Robert Simpson
Robert Wiesehan
Robert William Crocker
Robert Wockner
Roberto López Arnau
Roberto Nieves
===== PAGE 325 =====
baCkerS •321 
Robertson Sondoh Jr
Robin Droste
Robin Schoonover
Robin Wenström
Rodney J Kelly
Roger Smith
Roger Snyder
Rogue Comet
Rogue Fithp
Rolf Laun
Ron
Ron Beck
Ron Boero
Ross Cowman
Ross Mills
Ross Smith
Rowan Lloyd
Rowell
Roy Church
rsdockery
Ruben Navarro
Ruhuka
Rus Ketcham
Russell Saur
Russell Townsend
Russell Ventimeglia
RustingKnight
RVH
Ryan
Ryan Anderson
Ryan Bearrick
Ryan Crowe
Ryan Estep
Ryan James Kolodziejczak
Ryan Junk
Ryan Kent
Ryan Lybarger
Ryan McCarter
Ryan Meier
Ryan Moore
Ryan Nunes
Ryan O’Connor
Ryan Percival
Ryan St. Wrba
Ryan Wiegert
Ryan Ziegler
Rysa
S. Kilian
Saajan 9000
Sabastian
Sage Barton
Sage LaTorra
Saila Oikelmus
Salva Campoy
Sam
Sam CB
Sam Curry
Sam Garamy
Sam Genoese
Sam Hawken
Sam Hillaire
Sam Hinshaw
Sam Lawton
Sam Malcolm
Sam Phoenix
Sam Slocum
Sam Zeitlin
Samantha
Sami Cyberpilot Veillard
Samir
Samjoko Publishing
Samoel Di Wilsleff
Samuel
Samuel Doepken
Samuel Klingensmith
Samuel Puddleduck
Samuel Schuerch
Sara Waits
Sarick
Sarutomaseth@gmail.com
Sascha Weber
Sasha Thirlby-Flynn
Saturn McLaughlin
Savannah Casto
Scott
Scott Caslow
Scott Donatti
Scott Ferreira
Scott Gomoll
Scott Hess
Scott Hill
scott jenks
Scott Maynard
Scott Morrison
Scott P McClellan
Scott Serro
Scott Skene
Scott Thede
Scot t Tooker
Scott Udall
Scott Whitehurst
SeaGnome
Sean
Sean ‘Ariamaki’ Riedinger
Sean Ebersviller
Sean Hinphy
Sean Mannion
Sean Mattox
Sean Richmond
Sean Rivera
Sean Silva-Miramon
Sean Smith
Sean Trader
Seany
SeaWy r m
Sebastian
Sebastian Banzet
Sébastien Mailier
secondrevan
SeeleyOne
semiomant
Sergio Silvio Herrera Gea
Seth A Spurlock
Seth Day
SGM
sgreimann
Shad Corliss
Shadowriku
ShaggyTh3Dog
Shale Crom
Shaleblade
Shan Lewis
Shane
Shane C
Shane Dunlap
Shane Gallocher
Shane Jackson
Shane Phillips
Shane Starr
Shane Trapp
Shawn Meyer
Shawn Wood
Sheldon
Shelly Consoli
Sheringford Hope
Shervyn
Simon Brunning
Simon Carter
Simon Geard
Simon Jennings
Simon Joseph Brown
Simon Plain
Simon Smalley
Simon Stroud
Sir Aldi
SirJAGman
Skye
Skylar
Smith
Snake
Soap
Sohrab Zolfaghari
Sol Extract
Solin Outlander
Sophia Brandt
SoSo_Tsundere
Spencer Sandoval
Spencer Wankier
Spenser A Rubin
Spenser Isdahl
Spyros Stavropoulos
Spyros Veronikis
Stacy Forsythe
Stanley Huang
Stargazer
Stefan Lahr
Stefan M. Feltmann
Steff Bisinger
Stephan
Stephan Szabo
Stephanie Bryant
Stepha n ie Tu r ner
Stephen
Stephen L.
Stephen Lewis
Stephen Paterson
Steve
Steve Burchett
Steve Bush
Steve Cooper
Steve Dodge
Steve Guetre
Steve Hyatt
Steve Pugh
Steve Thompson
Steve Van Gorder
Stevec
Steven
Steven A Murray
Steven Bakker
Steven Cornell
Steven Fetter
Steven G
Steven Locke
Steven Lord
Steven Roman
Steven Sparkman
Steven Stone
Steven Wales
Steven Warble
Steven Ward
Stew Wilson
Storapan
Storium / Stephen Hood
Stras “Space Cowboy” 
Acimovic
Stuart Keith Rabson
Susan Mair
Suwaree
Suzi
Sven Scheurer
SwiftOne
Sylvain Martel
Sylvestre Picard
Sythmaster
Taichara
Tamoline
Tamuz
Tanner Clark
Tanner Yea
Tapani Moilanen
Targaff
Tarkom
Taylor Bleir
Taylor Goehring
Taylor LaBresh
Tazdrin
Team AlecSanChar
Ted
Tef mon
Tegan Smith
Tehjo
Temmo Cramer
Tentreto
Teorius
Terrasaur
Terry Gilbert
Terry Kolhoff
Tex tBasedBob
Thanasis Tsiakmakis
The Cartularium
The Cold Flames of Eternity
The Demolissionary
The Elderflower
The Enigmatic Cakelord
The Lost King
The Rooster
The Rosenthal Family
thegreat93
thekingtiger8
TheMunkis
Theo
TheOnlyWes
Theophenes
TheRustyScale
Thien Nguyendo
Thierry De Gagné
Thomas Brindley
Thomas Egebak
Thomas Franz
Thomas Green
Thomas Günther Estabrook
Thomas Ladegard
Thomas P. Kurilla
Thomas Rim
Thomas Scroggs
Thomas Tatum
Thomas Vanstraelen
Thomas Walters
Thomas Whittaker
Thor Hansen
Thorin Messer
Thoryn Haylett
thraggon@gmail.com
ThrustBomb
Tibor Kosa
Tiernan
Tiernán Ó hAlmhain
Tiffany Korta
Tim Bruning
Tim D
Tim Fowler
Tim Goodfellow
Tim H
Tim Knapp
Tim Rudloff
Tim Smith
Timecrash
Timo van Balen
Timolution
timonen90@hotmail.com
Timothy
Timothy Carroll
Timothy Carter
Timothy Huygens
Timothy Lam
Timothy McGowan
Timothy Samuel Whitworth
Tobey Feeley
Tobias Dahlberg
Todd Agt he
Todd McCorkle
Todd Phillip Hansen
Toju X inshu
Tom Androy
Tom Bolenbaugh
Tom Cifel li
Tom Foolery Pritchard
Tom Lommel
Tom McGrenery
Tom Shen
Tom W hite
tom.kalbfleisch@gmail.com
Tomas B. C.
Tomas J Skucas
Tomas Rocha Martins
Tomer Gura ntz
Tomio
Tone Berg
Toni P.
Toni Rheker
Tony A. Thompson
Tony Digaeta no
Tony Lin
Tony Patterson
Topcc
Torstein Rødset
T oryn
Toy Spears
Trampas Johnson
Travis Cannon
Travis Coker
Travis Geery
Travis Wright
Trent Hamm
Trevor Bailey
Trevor Bammel
Trevor Fish
Trevor Hannon
Trevor McDonald
Trevor Proffitt
Trevor Sheldrake
Trevor Turner
Trevor Waggoner
Trip Space-Parasite
Tripleyew
Tristan Chester
Tristan Harness
Tristan Stewart
Troy LaGro
Troy Otway
Trylden
tunglashr
Turbiales
TurboGuy16
Tyler
Tyler Br unet
Tyler Frazier
Tyler Hunt
Tyler Just in
Tyler Martinez
Tyler Potter
Tyler Rennel l
T yler Wirth
Ty r ia n
Ubiratan Pires Alberton
Universal Knight
Uqbarian
Uwe Schumacher
Vaclav G. Ujcik
Valkyness
Valle Fabio
Valthek
Valtteri Rantamäki
Vance Rawson
Veronica Wakefield-Cooper
Vex Godglove
Vicknesh Suppramaniam
Victor Grinevskii
Victor Serrano
Victor Suarez
Victor Zammit
Vidal Bairos
Vincent Eskilsson
Vincent Newkirk
Vincent Yasi
Vincente Gonsalves
Violet Cason
Vlad Zsariski
Vojtech Pribyl
Von Redrikk Allenegui
VonEther
Vony256
Vorindi
Vorpal Rapier
W. David Pattison
Wade Patterson
wadledo
Wajanai Snidvongs
Walt
Wannes Ooms
Warren
Warren Nelson
Waste93
Wayne Clemmer
Wayne Grelle
Wes
Wes Fournier
Wes Makin
Wesley E. Marshall
Wesley S. Batson
wetgauntlet
whitewolfzita
Widdershins
Wilhelm Fitzpatrick
Will Bryant
Will Dawson
Will Gaffey
Will Konijn
Will Mitchell
Will Smith
William
William Anderson
William Fischer
William Hensley
William Hochella
William J. Decker
William James Dowie
William Kirk
William McCleery
William Nourse
William P
William Sainty
William Strickling
Willoxq
Willy Dustis, Esq.
Workshop
Xander
Xander Guzman
Xanmyral
Xavi Nieto
xtheflysamuraix
Yann Raoul
Yellowrobe
Yeran
Yodoza
Yongi
Yossi and Dad Siragher
You Don’t Meet In An Inn
Young-hoon Lee
Yragael
Zac W
Zach
Zach Alexander
Zach Edwards
Zach Gauthier
Zachary B. Rogan
Zachary Bryan
Zachary Pilarski
Zachary Wysk
zachary.callen@gmail.com
Zack MacDonald
Zak Gordon
Zeb Berryman
Zelix
Zera Veronica Day
Zyfram
Zynx 